
CHAPTER I


No one can doubt that the maigstrate ought greatly to interest himself
in the care of youth; for where it is neglected it is hurtful to the
city, for every state ought to be governed according to its particular
nature; for the form and manners of each government are peculiar to
itself; and these, as they originally established it, so they usually
still preserve it. For instance, democratic forms and manners a
democracy; oligarchic, an oligarchy: but, universally, the best
manners produce the best government. Besides, as in every business and
art there are some things which men are to learn first and be made
accustomed to, which are necessary to perform their several works; so
it is evident that the same thing is necessary in the practice of
virtue. As there is one end in view in every city, it is evident that
education ought to be one and the same in each; and that this should
be a common care, and not the individual's, as it now is, when every
one takes care of his own children separately; and their instructions
are particular also, each person teaching them as they please; but
what ought to be engaged in ought to be common to all. Besides, no one
ought to think that any citizen belongs to him in particular, but to
the state in general; for each one is a part of the state, and it is
the natural duty of each part to regard the good of the whole: and for
this the Lacedaemonians may be praised; for they give the greatest
attention to education, and make it public. It is evident, then, that
there should be laws concerning education, and that it should be
public.



