
ITALIAN DEBAUCHERY.

If chastity is none of the most shining virtues of the French, it is
still less so of the Italians. Almost all the travellers who have
visited Italy, agree in describing it as the most abandoned of all the
countries of Europe. At Venice, at Naples, and indeed in almost every
part of Italy, women are taught from their infancy, the various arts of
alluring to their arms, the young and unwary, and of obtaining from
them, while heated by love or wine, every thing that flattery and false
smiles can obtain in those unguarded moments: and so little infamous is
the trade of prostitution, and so venal the women, that hardly any rank
or condition set them above being bribed to it, nay, they are frequently
assisted by their male friends and acquaintances to drive a good
bargain; nor does their career of debauchery finish with their unmarried
state; the vows of fidelity which they make at the altar, are like the
vows and oaths made upon too many other occasions, only considered as
nugatory forms, which law has obliged them to take, but custom absolved
them from performing. They even claim and enjoy greater liberties after
marriage than before; every married woman has a cicisbey, or gallant,
who attends her to all public places, hands her in and out of her
carriage, picks up her gloves or fan, and a thousand other little
offices of the same natures; but this is only his public employment, as
a reward for which, he is entitled to have the lady as often as he
pleases at a place of retirement sacred to themselves, where no person
not even the most intrusive husband must enter, to be witness of what
passes between them. This has been considered by people of other
nations, as a custom not altogether consistent with chastity and purity
of manners; the Italians themselves however, endeavor to justify it in
their conversations with strangers, and Baretti has of late years
published a formal vindication of it to the world. In this vindication
he has not only deduced the original of it from pure Platonic love, but
would willingly persuade us that it is still continued upon the same
mental principles; a doctrine which the world will hardly be credulous
enough to swallow, even though he should offer more convincing arguments
to support it than he has already done.


NAKED FAKIERS

So different over all the world are the sects of saints as well as of
sinners, that besides the Bramins, a set of innocent and religious
priests, who have rendered their women virtuous by treating them with
kindness and humanity, there are another sect of religio-philosophical
drones, called Fakiers, who contribute as much as they can to debauch
the sex, under a pretence of superior sanctity. These hypocritical
saints, like some of the ridiculous sects which formerly existed in
Europe, wear no clothes; considering them only as proper appendages to
sinners, who are ashamed, because they are sensible of guilt; while
they, being free from every stain of pollution, have no shame to cover.
In this original state of nature, these idle and pretended devotees,
assemble together sometimes in armies of ten or twelve thousand, and
under a pretence of going in pilgrimage to certain temples, like locusts
devour every thing on their way; the men flying before them, and
carrying all that they can out of the reach of their depredations; while
the women, not in the least afraid of a naked army of lusty saints,
throw themselves in their way, or remain quietly at home to receive
them.

It has long been an opinion, well established all over India, that there
is not in nature so powerful a remedy for removing the sterility of
women, as the prayers of these sturdy naked saints. On this account,
barren women constantly apply to them for assistance; which when the
good natured Fakier has an indication to grant, he leaves his slipper,
or his staff at the door of the lady's apartment with whom he is
praying; a symbol so sacred, that it effectually prevents any one from
violating the secrecy of their devotion; but should he forget this
signal, and at the same time be distant from the protection of his
brethren, a sound drubbing is frequently the reward of his pious
endeavors. But though they venture sometimes in Hindostan, to treat a
Fakier in this unholy manner, in other parts of Asia and Africa, such is
the veneration in which these lusty saints are held, that they not only
have access when they please, to perform private devotions with barren
women, but are accounted so holy, that they may at any time, in public
or private, confer a personal favor upon a woman, without bringing upon
her either shame or guilt; and no woman dare refuse to gratify their
passion. Nor indeed, has any one an inclination of this kind; because
she, upon whom this personal favor has been conferred, is considered by
herself, and by all the people, as having been sanctified and made more
holy by the action.

So much concerning the conduct of the Fakiers in debauching women, seems
certain. But it is by travellers further related, that wherever they
find a woman who is exceedingly handsome, they carry her off privately
to one of their temples; but in such a manner, as to make her and the
people believe, that she is carried away by the god who is there
worshipped; who being violently in love with her, took that method to
procure her for his wife. This done, they perform a nuptial ceremony,
and make her further believe that she is married to the god; when, in
reality, she is only married to one of the Fakiers who personates him.
Women who are treated in this manner are revered by the people as the
wives of the gods, and by that stratagem secured solely to the Fakiers,
who have cunning enough to impose themselves as gods upon some of these
women, through the whole of their lives. In countries where reason is
stronger than superstition, we almost think this impossible: where the
contrary is the case, there is nothing too hard to be credited.
Something like this was done by the priests of ancient Greece and Rome;
and a few centuries ago, tricks of the same nature were practiced by the
monks, and other libertines, upon some of the visionary and enthusiastic
women of Europe. Hence we need not think it strange, if the Fakiers
generally succeed in attempts of this nature; when we consider that they
only have to deceive a people brought up in the most consummate
ignorance; and that nothing can be more flattering to female vanity,
than for a woman to suppose herself such a peculiar favorite of the
divinity she worships, as to be chosen, from all her companions, to the
honor of being admitted to his embraces; a favor, which her
self-admiration will dispose her more readily to believe than examine.

