
OF MIND.

External indications as to mind may be derived from figure, from gait,
and from dress.

As to figure, a certain symmetry or disproportion of parts (either of
which depends immediately upon the locomotive system)--or a certain
softness or hardness of form (which belongs exclusively to the vital
system)--these reciprocally denote a locomotive symmetry or
disproportion--or a vital softness or hardness--or a mental delicacy or
coarseness, which will be found also indicated by the features of the
face.

These qualities are marked in pairs, as each belonging to its respective
system; for, without this, there can be no accurate or useful
observation.

As to gait, that progression which advances, unmodified by any lateral
movement of the body, or any perpendicular rising of the head, and which
belongs exclusively to the locomotive system--or that soft lateral
rolling of the body, which belongs exclusively to the vital system--or
that perpendicular rising or falling of the head at every impulse to
step, which belongs exclusively to the mental system--these reciprocally
indicate a corresponding locomotive, or vital, or mental character,
which will be found also indicated by the features of the face.

To put to the test the utility of these elements of observation and
indication, let us take a few instances.--If, in any individual,
locomotive symmetry of figure is combined with direct and linear gait, a
character of mind and countenance not absolutely repulsive, but cold and
insipid, is indicated. If vital softness of figure is combined, with a
gentle lateral rolling of the body in its gait, voluptuous character and
expression of countenance are indicated.--If delicacy of outline in the
figure, be combined with perpendicular rising of the head, levity,
perhaps vanity, is indicated.--But there are innumerable combinations
and modifications of the elements which we have just described.
Expressions of pride, determination, obstinacy, &c., are all observable.

The gait, however, is often formed, in a great measure, by local or
other circumstances, by which it is necessary that the observer should
avoid being misled.

Dress, as affording indications, though less to be relied on than the
preceding, is not without its value. The woman who possesses a
cultivated taste, and a corresponding expression of countenance, will
generally be tastefully dressed; and the vulgar woman, with features
correspondingly rude, will easily be seen through the inappropriate mask
in which her milliner or dressmaker may have invested her.

