
OTHER PARTICULARS RESPECTING FEMALES DURING THE AGE OF CHIVALRY.

When a man had said any thing that reflected dishonor on a woman, or
accused her of a crime, she was not obliged to fight him to prove her
innocence: the combat would have been unequal. But she might choose a
champion to fight in her cause, or expose himself to the horrid trial,
in order to clear her reputation. Such champions were generally selected
from her lovers or friends. But if she fixed upon any other, so high was
the spirit of martial glory, and so eager the thirst of defending the
weak and helpless sex, that we meet with no instance of a champion ever
having refused to fight for, or undergo whatever custom required, in
defence of the lady who had honored him with the appointment.

To the motives already mentioned, we may add another. He who had
refused, must inevitably have been branded with the name of coward: and,
so despicable was the condition of a coward, in those times of general
heroism, that death itself appeared the more preferable choice. Nay,
such was the rage of fighting for women, that it became customary for
those who could not be honored with the decision of their real quarrels,
to create fictitious ones concerning them, in order to create also a
necessity of fighting.

Nor was fighting for the ladies confined to single combatants. Crowds of
gallants entered the lists against each other. Even kings called out
their subjects, to shew their love for their mistresses, by cutting the
throats of their neighbors, who had not in the least offended.

In the fourteenth century, when the Countess of Blois and the widow of
Mountford were at war against each other, a conference was agreed to, on
pretence of settling a peace, but in reality to appoint a combat.
Instead of negotiating, they soon challenged each other; and Beaumanoir,
who was at the head of the Britons, publicly declared that they fought
for no other motive, than to see, by the victory, who had the fairest
mistress.

In the fifteenth century, we find an anecdote of this kind still more
extraordinary. John, duke de Bourbonnois, published a declaration, that
he would go over to England, with sixteen knights, and there fight it
out, in order to avoid idleness, and merit the good graces of his
mistress.

James IV. of Scotland, having, in all tournaments, professed himself
knight to queen Anne of France, she summoned him to prove himself her
true and valorous champion, by taking the field in her defence, against
his brother-in-law, Henry VIII. of England. He obeyed the romantic
mandate; and the two nations bled to feed the vanity of a woman.

Warriors, when ready to engage, invoked the aid of their mistresses, as
poets do that of the Muses. If they fought valiantly, it reflected honor
on the Dulcineas they adored; but if they turned their backs on their
enemies, the poor ladies were dishonored forever.

Love, was at that time, the most prevailing motive to fighting. The
famous Gaston de Foix, who commanded the French troops at the battle of
Ravenna, took advantage of this foible of his army. He rode from rank to
rank, calling his officers by name, and even some of his private men,
recommending to them their country, their honor, and, above all, to shew
what they could do for their mistresses.

The women of those ages, the reader may imagine, were certainly more
completely happy than in any other period of the world. This, however,
was not in reality the case.

Custom, which governs all things with the most absolute sway, had,
through a long succession of years, given her sanction to such combats
as were undertaken, either to defend the innocence, or display the
beauty of women. Custom, therefore, either obliged a man to fight for a
woman who desired him, or marked the refusal with infamy and disgrace.
But custom did not oblige him, in every other part of his conduct, to
behave to this woman, or to the sex in general, with that respect and
politeness which have happily distinguished the character of more modern
times.

The same man who would have encountered giants, or gigantic
difficulties, "when a lady was in the case," had but little idea of
adding to her happiness, by supplying her with the comforts and
elegancies of life. And, had she asked him to stoop, and ease her of a
part of that domestic slavery which, almost in every country, falls to
the lot of women, he would have thought himself quite affronted.

But besides, men had nothing else, in those ages, than that kind of
romantic gallantry to recommend them. Ignorant of letters, arts, and
sciences, and every thing that refines human nature, they were, in every
thing where gallantry was not concerned, rough and unpolished in their
manners and behavior. Their time was spent in drinking, war, gallantry,
and idleness. In their hours of relaxation, they were but little in
company with their women; and when they were, the indelicacies of the
carousal, or the cruelties of the field, were almost the only subjects
they had to talk of.

From the subversion of the Roman empire, to the fourteenth or fifteenth
century, women spent most of their time alone. They were almost entire
strangers to the joys of social life. They seldom went abroad, but to be
spectators of such public diversions and amusements as the fashion of
the times countenanced. Francis I. was the first monarch who introduced
them on public days to court.

Before his time, nothing was to be seen at any of the courts of Europe,
but long bearded politicians, plotting the destruction of the rights and
liberties of mankind; and warriors clad in complete armor, ready to put
their plots in execution.

In the eighth century, so slavish was the condition of women on the one
hand, and so much was beauty coveted on the other, that, for about two
hundred years, the kings of Austria were obliged to pay a tribute to the
Moors, of one hundred beautiful virgins per annum.

In the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries, elegance had scarcely any
existence, and even cleanliness was hardly considered as laudable. The
use of linen was not known; and the most delicate of the fair sex wore
woollen shifts.

In the time of Henry VIII. the peers of the realm carried their wives
behind them on horseback when they went to London; and, in the same
manner, took them back to their country seats, with hoods of waxed linen
over their heads, and wrapped in mantles of cloth, to secure them from
the cold.

There was one misfortune of a singular nature, to which women were
liable in those days: they were in perpetual danger of being accused of
witchcraft, and suffering all the cruelties and indignities of a mob,
instigated by superstition and directed by enthusiasm; or of being
condemned by laws, which were at once a disgrace to humanity and to
sense. Even the bloom of youth and beauty could not secure them from
torture and from death. But when age and wrinkles attacked a woman, if
any thing uncommon happened in her neighborhood, she was almost sure of
atoning with her life for a crime it was impossible for her to commit.

