
WOMAN IN THE PATRIARCHAL AGES.

The condition of women among the ancient patriarchs, appears to have
been but extremely indifferent. When Abraham entertained the angels,
sent to denounce the destruction of Sodom, he seems to have treated his
wife as a menial servant: "Make ready quickly," said he to her, "three
measures of fine meal, knead it, and make cakes on the hearth."

In many parts of the east, water is only to be met with deep in the
earth, and to draw it from the wells is, consequently, fatiguing and
laborious. This, however, was the task of the daughters of Jethro the
Midianite; to whom so little regard was paid, either on account of their
sex, or the rank of their father, as high priest of the country, that
the neighboring shepherds not only insulted them, but forcibly took from
them the water they had drawn.

This was the task of Rebecca, who not only drew water for Abraham's
servant, but for his camels also, while the servant stood an idle
spectator of the toil. Is it not natural to imagine, that, as he was on
an embassy to court the damsel for Isaac, his master's son, he would
have exerted his utmost efforts to please, and become acceptable?

When he had concluded his bargain, and was carrying her home, we meet
with a circumstance worthy of remark. When she first approached Isaac,
who had walked out into the fields to meet her, she did it in the most
submissive manner, as if she had been approaching a lord and master,
rather than a fond and passionate lover. From this circumstance, as well
as from several others, related in the sacred history, it would seem
that women, instead of endeavoring, as in modern times, to persuade the
world that they confer an immense favor on a lover, by deigning to
accept of him, did not scruple to confess, that the obligation was
conferred on themselves.

This was the case with Ruth, who had laid herself down at the feet of
Boaz; and being asked by him who she was, answered, "I am Ruth, thine
handmaid; spread, therefore, thy skirt over thine handmaid, for thou art
a near kinsman."

When Jacob went to visit his uncle Laban, he met Rachel, Laban's
daughter, in the fields, attending on the flocks of her father.

In a much later period, Tamar, one of the daughters of king David, was
sent by her father to perform the servile office of making cakes for her
brother Amnon.

The simplicity of the times in which these things happened, no doubt,
very much invalidates the strength of the conclusions that naturally
arise from them. But, notwithstanding, it still appears that women were
not then treated with the delicacy which they have experienced among
people more polished and refined.

Polygamy also prevailed; which is so contrary to the inclination of the
sex, and so deeply wounds the delicacy of their feelings, that it is
impossible for any woman voluntarily to agree to it, even where it is
authorized by custom and by law. Wherever, therefore, polygamy takes
place, we may assure ourselves that women have but little authority, and
have scarcely arrived at any consequence in society.

