
CHAPTER VIII.

BEING MARRIED.

     "If ever one is to pray--if ever one is to feel grave and
     anxious--if ever one is to shrink from vain show and vain babble,
     surely it is just on the occasion of two human beings binding
     themselves to one another, for better and for worse till death
     part them."--_Letters and Memorials of Jane Welsh Carlyle._


An elderly unmarried lady of Scotland, after reading aloud to her two
sisters, also unmarried, the births, marriages, and deaths in the
ladies' corner of a newspaper, thus moralized: "Weel, weel, these are
solemn events--death and marriage; but ye ken they're what we must all
come to." "Eh, Miss Jeanny, but ye have been lang spared!" was the reply
of the youngest sister. Those who in our thoughts were represented as
being only in prospect of marriage are spared no longer. They have now
come to what they had to come to--a day "so full of gladness, and so
full of pain"--a day only second in importance to the day of birth; in
a word, to their wedding day.

                      "Are [they] sad or merry?
  Like to the time o' the year between the extremes
  Of hot and cold: [they are] nor sad nor merry."

And yet few on such a day are as collected as the late Duke of
Sutherland is said to have been. Just two hours before the time fixed
for his marriage with one of the most beautiful women in England, a
friend came upon him in St. James's Park, leaning carelessly over the
railings at the edge of the water, throwing crumbs to the waterfowl.
"What! you here to-day! I thought you were going to be married this
morning?" "Yes," replied the duke, without moving an inch or stopping
his crumb-throwing, "I believe I am."

To men of a shyer and more nervous temperament, to be married without
chloroform is a very painful operation. They find it difficult to screw
their courage to the marrying place. On one occasion a bridegroom so far
forgot what was due to himself and his bride as to render himself unfit
to take the vows through too frequent recourse on the wedding morn to
the cup that cheers--and inebriates. The minister was obliged to refuse
to proceed with the marriage. A few days later, the same thing occurred
with the same couple; whereupon the minister gravely remonstrated with
the bride, and said they must not again present themselves with the
bridegroom in such a state. "But, sir, he--_he winna come when he's
sober_," was the candid rejoinder. It is possible that this bridegroom,
whose courage was so very Dutch, might have been deterred by the
impending fuss and publicity of a marriage ceremony, rather than by any
fear of or want of affection for her who was to become his wife. Even in
the best assorted marriages there is always more or less anxiety felt
upon the wedding-day.

The possibility of a hitch arising from a sudden change of inclination
on the part of the principals is ludicrously illustrated by the case of
two couples who on one occasion presented themselves at the Mayoralty,
in a suburb of Paris, to carry out the civil portion of their marriage
contract. During the ceremony one of the bridegrooms saw, or fancied he
saw, his partner making "sheep's-eyes" at the bridegroom opposite. Being
of a jealous temperament, he laid his hand roughly on her arm, and said
sharply: "Mademoiselle, which of the two brides are you? You are mine, I
believe: then oblige me by confining your glances to me." The bride was
a young woman of spirit, and resenting the tone in which the reprimand
was made, retorted: "Ah, Monsieur, if you are jealous already, I am
likely to lead a pleasant life with you!" The jealous bridegroom made an
angry reply; and then the other bridegroom must needs put his oar in.
This led to a general dispute, which the Mayor in vain endeavoured to
quell. The bridegrooms stormed at each other; and the brides, between
their hysterical sobs, mutually accused each other of perfidy. At length
the Mayor, as a last resource, adjourned the ceremony for half an hour,
to admit of an amicable understanding being arrived at, both brides
having refused to proceed with the celebration of the nuptials. When, at
the expiration of the half-hour, the parties were summoned to reappear,
they did so, to the amazement of the bewildered Mayor, in an altogether
different order from that in which they had originally entered. The
bridegrooms had literally effected an exchange of brides--the jealous
bridegroom taking the jealous bride; and the other, the lady whose
fickle glances had led to the rupture. All four adhering to the new
arrangement, the Mayor, it is recorded, had no alternative but to
proceed with the ceremony.

The ruling passion is not more strongly felt in death than in marriage.
Dr. Johnson displayed the sturdiness of his character as he journeyed
with the lady of his choice from Birmingham to Derby, at which last
place they were to be married. Their ride thither, which we give in the
bridegroom's own words, is an amusing bit of literary history. "Sir, she
had read the old romances, and had got into her head the fantastical
notion that a woman of spirit should use her lover like a dog. So, sir,
at first she told me that I rode too fast, and she could not keep up
with me: and when I rode a little slower, she passed me, and complained
that I lagged behind. I was not to be made the slave of caprice; and I
resolved to begin as I meant to end. I therefore pushed on briskly, till
I was fairly out of her sight. The road lay between two hedges, so I was
sure she could not miss it; and I contrived that she should soon come up
with me. When she did, I observed her to be in tears."

On the wedding-day of the celebrated M. Pasteur, who has made such
extraordinary discoveries about germs, the hour appointed for the
ceremony had arrived, but the bridegroom was not there. Some friends
rushed off to the laboratory and found him very busy with his apron on.
He was excessively cross at being disturbed, and declared that marriage
might wait, but his experiments could not do so.

He would indeed be a busy man who could not make time for a marriage
ceremony as brief as that which was employed in the celebration of a
marriage in Iowa, United States. The bride and bridegroom were told to
join their hands, and then asked: "Do you want one another?" Both
replied: "Yes." "Well, then, have one another;" and the couple were man
and wife. Most people, however, desire a more reverent solemnization of
marriage, which may be viewed in two aspects--as a natural institution,
and as a religious ordinance. In the Old Testament we see it as a
natural institution; in the New, it is brought before us in a religious
light. It is there likened to the union of Christ and the Church. The
union of Christ and the Church is not illustrated by marriage, but
marriage by this spiritual union; that is, the natural is based upon the
spiritual. And this is what is wanted; it gives marriage a religious
signification, and it thus becomes a kind of semi-sacrament. The
illustration teaches that in order to be happy though married the
principle of sacrifice must rule the conduct of the married. As no love
between man and wife can be true which does not issue in a sacrifice of
each for the other, so Christ gave Himself for His Church and the Church
sacrifices itself to His service. The only true love is self-devotion,
and the every-day affairs of married life must fail without this
principle of self-sacrifice or the cross of Christ.

"Would to God that His dear Son were bidden to all weddings as to that
of Cana! Truly then the wine of consolation and blessing would never be
lacking. He who desires that the young of his flock should be like
Jacob's, fair and ring-straked, must set fair objects before their eyes;
and he who would find a blessing in his marriage, must ponder the
holiness and dignity of this mystery, instead of which too often
weddings become a season of mere feasting and disorder."

A new home is being formed in reference to which the bride and groom
should think, "This is none other but the house of God, and this is the
gate of heaven. As for me and my house, we will serve the Lord." The
parish church is called "God's House;" but if all the parishioners
rightly used their matrimony, every house in the parish might be called
the same. Home is the place of the highest joys; religion should
sanctify it. Home is the sphere of the deepest sorrows; the highest
consolation of religion should assuage its griefs. Home is the place of
the greatest intimacy of heart with heart; religion should sweeten it
with the joy of confidence. Home discovers all faults; religion should
bless it with the abundance of charity. Home is the place for
impressions, for instruction and culture; there should religion open her
treasures of wisdom and pronounce her heavenly benediction.

An old minister previous to the meeting of the General Assembly of the
Church of Scotland used to pray that the assembly might be so guided as
"_no to do ony harm_." We have often thought that such a prayer as this
would be an appropriate commencement for the marriage service.
Considering the issues that are involved in marriage--the misery unto
the third and fourth generation that may result from it--those who join
together man and woman in matrimony ought to pray that in doing so they
may do no harm. Certainly the opening exhortation of the Church of
England marriage service is sufficiently serious. It begins by
proclaiming the sacredness of marriage as a Divine institution;
hallowed as a type of the mystical union between Christ and His Church;
honoured (even in its festive aspect) by Our Lord's presence and first
miracle at Cana of Galilee; declared to be "honourable among all men;
and therefore not by any to be enterprised, nor taken in hand,
unadvisedly, lightly, or wantonly; but reverently, discreetly,
advisedly, soberly, and in the fear of God; duly considering the causes
for which Matrimony was ordained." These are explained in words
plain-spoken almost to coarseness before allusion is made to the higher
moral relation of "mutual society, help, and comfort" which marriage
creates.

Then follows "the betrothal" in which the man "plights his troth"
(pledges his truth), taking the initiative, while the woman gives hers
in return:

  "The 'wilt thou,' answered, and again
  The 'wilt thou' asked, till out of twain
  Her sweet 'I will' has made ye one."

The "joining of hands" is from time immemorial the pledge of
covenant--we "shake hands over a bargain"--and is here an essential part
of the marriage ceremony.

The use of the ring is described in the prayer that follows as the token
of the marriage covenant--from the man the token of his confiding to his
wife all authority over what is his, and for the woman the badge of
belonging to his house. The old service has a quaint rubric declaring it
put on the fourth finger of the left hand, because thence "there is a
vein leading direct to the heart." The Prayer Book of Edward VI. directs
that "the man shall give unto the woman a ring, and other tokens of
spousage, as gold or silver, laying the same upon the book." This is
clearly the ancient bride price. Wheatly's "Book of Common Prayer" says,
"This lets us into the design of the ring, and intimates it to be the
remains of an ancient custom whereby it was usual for the man to
purchase the woman." The words to be spoken by the man are taken from
the old service, still using the ancient word "worship" (worth--ship)
for service and honour. They declare the dedication both of person and
substance to the marriage bond.

The Blessing is one of singular beauty and solemnity. It not only
invokes God's favour to "bless, preserve, and keep" the newly-made
husband and wife in this world, but looks beyond it to the life
hereafter, for which nothing can so well prepare them as a well-spent
wedded life here.

It is said that among the natives of India the cost to a father of
marrying his daughter is about equal to having his house burnt down.
Although brides are not so expensive in this country much money is
wasted on the wedding and preliminaries which would be very useful to
the young people a year or two afterwards.

We would not advise that there should be no wedding-breakfast and that
the bride should have no trousseau; but we do think that these
accessories should be in accordance with the family exchequer. Again,
wedding presents are often the very articles that the young couple need
least, and are not unfrequently found to be duplicates of the gifts of
other persons. But we cannot linger over the wedding festivities.

Adieu, young friends! and may joy crown you, love bless you, God speed
your career!

  "Some natural tears they dropp'd, but wip'd them soon;
  The world was all before them, where to choose
  Their place of rest, and Providence their guide.
  They, hand in hand, with wand'ring steps and slow,
  Through Eden took their solitary way."



