

BOOK IV.

OF SYSTEMS OF POLITICAL ECONOMY.



Political economy, considered as a branch of the science of a
statesman or legislator, proposes two distinct objects; first, to
provide a plentiful revenue or subsistence for the people, or,
more properly, to enable them to provide such a revenue or
subsistence for themselves; and, secondly, to supply the state or
commonwealth with a revenue sufficient for the public services.
It proposes to enrich both the people and the sovereign.

The different progress of opulence in different ages and nations,
has given occasion to two different systems of political economy,
with regard to enrichiug the people. The one may be called the
system of commerce, the other that of agriculture. I shall
endeavour to explain both as fully and distinctly as I can, and
shall begin with the system of commerce. It is the modern system,
and is best understood in our own country and in our own times.






CHAPTER     I.

OF THE PRINCIPLE OF THE COMMERCIAL OR MERCANTILE SYSTEM.

That wealth consists in money, or in gold and silver, is a
popular notion which naturally arises from the double function of
money, as the instrument of commerce, and as the measure of
value. In consequence of its being the instrument of commerce,
when we have money we can more readily obtain whatever else we
have occasion for, than by means of any other commodity. The
great affair, we always find, is to get money. When that is
obtained, there is no difficulty in making any subsequent
purchase. In consequence of its being the measure of value, we
estimate that of all other commodities by the quantity of money
which they will exchange for. We say of a rich man, that he is
worth a great deal, and of a poor man, that he is worth very
little money. A frugal man, or a man eager to be rich, is said to
love money ; and a careless, a generous, or a profuse man, is
said to be indifferent about it. To grow rich is to get money ;
and wealth and money, in short, are, in common language,
considered as in every respect synonymous.

A rich country, in the same manner as a rich man, is supposed to
be a country abounding in money ; and to heap up gold and silver
in any country is supposed to be the readiest way to enrich it.
For some time after the discovery of America, the first inquiry
of the Spaniards, when they arrived upon any unknown coast, used
to be, if  there was any gold or silver to be found in the
neighbourhood? By the information which they received, they
judged whether it was worth while to make a settlement there, or
if the country was worth the conquering. Plano Carpino, a monk
sent ambassador from the king of France to one of the sons of the
famous Gengis Khan, says, that the Tartars used frequently to ask
him, if there was plenty of sheep and oxen in the kingdom of
France ? Their inquiry had the same object with that of the
Spaniards. They wanted to know if the country was rich enough to
be worth the conquering. Among the Tartars, as among all other
nations of shepherds, who are generally ignorant of the use of
money, cattle are the instruments of commerce and the measures of
value. Wealth, therefore, according to them, consisted in cattle,
as, according to the Spaniards, it consisted in gold and silver.
Of the two, the Tartar notion, perhaps, was the nearest to the
truth.

Mr Locke remarks a distinction between money and other moveable
goods. All other moveable goods, he says, are of so consumable a
nature, that the wealth which consists in them cannot be much
depended on; and a nation which abounds in them one year may,
without any exportation, but merely by their own waste and
extravagance, be in great want of them the next. Money, on the
contrary, is a steady friend, which, though it may travel about
from hand to hand, yet if it can be kept from going out of the
country, is not very liable to be wasted and consumed. Gold and
silver, therefore, are, according to him, the must solid and
substantial part of the moveable wealth of a nation ; and to
multiply those metals ought, he thinks, upon that account, to be
the great object of its political economy.

Others admit, that if a nation could be separated from all the
world, it would be of no consequence how much or how little money
circulated in it. The consumable goods, which were circulated by
means of this money, would only be exchanged for a greater or a
smaller number of pieces; but the real wealth or poverty of the
country, they allow, would depend altogether upon the abundance
or scarcity of those consumable goods. But it is otherwise, they
think, with countries which have connections with foreign
nations, and which are obliged to carry on foreign wars, and to
maintain fleets and armies in distant countries. This, they say,
cannot be done, but by sending abroad money to pay them with ;
and a nation cannot send much money abroad, unless it has a good
deal at home. Every such nation, therefore, must endeavour, in
time of peace, to accumulate gold and silver, that when occasion
requires, it may have wherewithal to carry on foreign wars.

In consequence of those popular notions, all the different
nations of Europe have studied, though to little purpose, every
possible means of accumulating gold and silver in their
respective countries. Spain and Portugal, the proprietors of the
principal mines which supply Europe with those metals, have
either prohibited their exportation under the severest penalties,
or subjected it to a considerable duty. The like prohibition
seems anciently to have made a part of the policy of most other
European nations. It is even to be found, where we should least
of all expect to find it, in some old Scotch acts of Parliament,
which forbid, under heavy penalties, the carrying gold or silver
forth of the kingdom. The like policy anciently took place both
in France and England.

When those countries became commercial, the merchants found this
prohibition, upon many occasions, extremely inconvenient. They
could frequently buy more advantageously with gold and silver,
than with any other commodity, the foreign goods which they
wanted, either to import into their own, or to carry to some
other foreign country. They remonstrated, therefore, against this
prohibition as hurtful to trade.

They represented, first, that the exportation of gold and silver,
in order to purchase foreign goods, did not always diminish the
quantity of those metals in the kingdom ; that, on the contrary,
it might frequently increase the quantity ; because, if the
consumption of foreign goods was not thereby increased in the
country, those goods might be re-exported to foreign countries,
and being there sold for a large profit, might bring back much
more treasure than was originally sent out to purchase them. Mr
Mun compares this operation of foreign trade to the seed-time and
harvest of agriculture. "If we only behold," says he, "the
actions of the husbandman in the seed. time, when he casteth away
much good corn into the ground, we shall account him rather a
madman than a husbandman. But when we consider his labours in the
harvest, which is the end of his endeavours, we shall find the
worth and plentiful increase of his actions."

They represented, secondly, that this prohibition could not
hinder the exportation of gold and silver, which, on account of
the smallness of their bulk in proportion to their value, could
easily be smuggled abroad. That this exportation could only be
prevented by a proper attention to what they called the balance
of trade. That when the country exported to a greater value than
it imported, a balance became due to it from foreign nations,
which was necessarily paid to it in gold and silver, and thereby
increased the quantity of those metals in the kingdom. But that
when it imported to a greater value than it exported, a contrary
balance became due to foreign nations, which was necessarily paid
to them in the same manner, and thereby diminished that quantity
: that in this case, to prohibit the exportation of those metals,
could not prevent it, but only, by making it more dangerous,
render it more expensive: that the exchange was thereby turned
more against the country which owed the balance, than it
otherwise might have been; the merchant who purchased a bill upon
the foreign country being obliged to pay the banker who sold it,
not only for the natural risk, trouble, and expense of sending
the money thither, but for the extraordinary risk arising from
the prohibition; but that the more the exchange was against any
country, the more the balance of trade became necessarily against
it; the money of that country becoming necessarily of so much
less value, in comparison with that of the country to which the
balance was due. That if the exchange between England and
Holland, for example, was five per cent. against England, it
would require 105 ounces of silver in England to purchase a bill
for 100 ounces of silver in Holland: that 105 ounces of silver in
England, therefore, would be worth only 100 ounces of silver in
Holland, and would purchase only a proportionable quantity of
Dutch goods ; but that 100 ounces of silver in Holland, on the
contrary, would be worth 105 ounces in England, and would
purchase a proportionable quantity of English goods;  that the
English goods which were sold to Holland would be sold so much
cheaper, and the Dutch goods which were sold to England so much
dearer, by the difference of the exchange : that the one would
draw so much less Dutch money to England, and the other so much
more English money to Holland, as this difference amounted to:
and that the balance of trade, therefore, would necessarily be so
much more against England, and would require a greater balance of
gold and silver to be exported to Holland.

Those arguments were partly solid and partly sophistical. They
were solid, so far as they asserted that the exportation of gold
and silver in trade might frequently be advantageous to the
country. They were solid, too, in asserting that no prohibition
could prevent their exportation, when private people found any
advantage in exporting them. But they were sophistical, in
supposing, that either to preserve or to augment the quantity of
those metals required more the attention of government, than to
preserve or to augment the quantity of any other useful
commodities, which the freedom of trade, without any such
attention, never fails to supply in the proper quantity. They
were sophistical, too, perhaps, in asserting that the high price
of exchange necessarily increased what they called the
unfavourable balance of trade, or occasioned the exportation of a
greater quantity of gold and silver. That high price, indeed, was
extremely disadvantageous to the merchants who had any money to
pay in foreign countries. They paid so much dearer for the bills
which their bankers granted them upon those countries. But though
the risk arising from the prohibition might occasion some
extraordinary expense to the bankers, it would not necessarily
carry any more money out of the country. This expense would
generally be all laid out in the country, in smuggling the money
out of it, and could seldom occasion the exportation of a single
sixpence beyond the precise sum drawn for. The high price of
exchange, too, would naturally dispose the merchants to endeavour
to make their exports nearly balance their imports, in order that
they might have this high exchange to pay upon as small a sum as
possible. The high price of exchange, besides, must necessarily
have operated as a tax, in raising the price of foreign goods,
and thereby diminishing their consumption. It would tend,
therefore, not to increase, but to diminish, what they called the
unfavourable balance of trade, and consequently the exportation
of gold and silver.

Such as they were, however, those arguments convinced the people
to whom they were addressed. They were addressed by merchants to
parliaments and to the councils of princes, to nobles, and to
country gentlemen; by those who were supposed to understand
trade, to those who were conscious to them selves that they knew
nothing about the matter. That foreign trade enriched the
country, experience demonstrated to the nobles and country
gentlemen, as well as to the merchants ; but how, or in what
manner, none of them well knew. The merchants knew perfectly in
what manner it enriched themselves, it was their business to know
it. But to know in what manner it enriched the country, was no
part of their business. The subject never came into their
consideration, but when they had occasion to apply to their
country for some change in the laws relating to foreign trade. It
then became necessary to say something about the beneficial
effects of foreign trade, and the manner in which those effects
were obstructed by the laws as they then stood. To the judges who
were to decide the business, it appeared a most satisfactory
account of the matter, when they were told that foreign trade
brought money into the country, but that the laws in question
hindered it from bringing so much as it otherwise would do. Those
arguments, therefore, produced the wished-for effect. The
prohibition of exporting gold and silver was, in France and
England, confined to the coin of those respective countries. The
exportation of foreign coin and of bullion was made free. In
Holland, and in some other places, this liberty was extended even
to the coin of the country. The attention of government was
turned away  from guarding against the exportation of gold and
silver, to watch over the balance of trade, as the only cause
which could occasion any augmentation or diminution of those
metals. From one fruitless care, it was turned away to another
care much more intricate, much more embarrassing, and just
equally fruitless. The title of Mun's book, England's Treasure in
Foreign Trade, became a fundamental maxim in the political
economy, not of England only, but of all other commercial
countries. The inland or home trade, the most important of all,
the trade in which an equal capital affords the greatest revenue,
and creates the greatest employment to the people of the country,
was considered as subsidiary only to foreign trade. It neither
brought money into the country, it was said, nor carried any out
of it. The country, therefore, could never become either richer
or poorer by means of it, except so far as its prosperity or
decay might indirectly influence the state of foreign trade.

A country that has no mines of its own, must undoubtedly draw its
gold and silver from foreign countries, in the same manner as one
that has no vineyards of its own must draw its wines. It does not
seem necessary, however, that the attention of government should
he more turned towards the one than towards the other object. A
country that has wherewithal to buy wine, will always get the
wine which it has occasion for ; and a country that  has
wherewithal to buy gold and silver, will never be in want of
those metals. They are to be bought for a certain price, like all
other commodities; and as they are the price of all other
commodities, so all other commodities are the price of those
metals. We trust, with perfect security, that the freedom of
trade, without any attention of government, will always supply us
with the wine which we have occasion for; and we may trust, with
equal security, that it will always supply us with all the gold
and silver which we can afford to purchase or to employ, either
in circulating our commodities or in other uses.

The quantity of every commodity which human industry can either
purchace or produce, naturally regulates itself in every country
according to the effectual demand, or according to the demand of
those who are willing to pay the whole rent, labour, and profits,
which must be paid in order to prepare and bring it to market.
But no commodities regulate themselves more easily or more
exactly, according to this effectual demand, than gold and silver
; because, on account of the small bulk and great value of those
metals, no commodities can be more easily transported from one
place to another ; from the places where they are cheap, to those
where they are dear ; from the places where they exceed, to those
where they fall short of this effectual demand. If there were in
England, for example, an effectual demand for an additional
quantity of gold, a packet-boat could bring from Lisbon, or from
wherever else it was to be had, fifty tons of gold, which could
be coined into more than five millions of guineas. But if there
were an effectual demand for grain to the same value, to import
it would require, at five guineas a-ton, a million of tons of
shipping, or a thousand ships of a thousand tons each. The navy
of England would not be sufficient.

When the quantity of gold and silver imported into any country
exceeds the effectual demand, no vigilance of government can
prevent their exportation. All the sanguinary laws of Spain and
Portugal are not able to keep their gold and silver at home. The
continual importations from Peru and Brazil exceed the effectual
demand of those countries, and sink the price of those metals
there below that in the neighbouring countries. If, on the
contrary, in any particular country, their quantity fell short of
the effectual demand, so as to raise their price above that of
the neighbouring countries, the government would have no occasion
to take any pains to import them. If it were even to take pains
to prevent their importation, it would not be able to effectuate
it. Those metals, when the Spartans had got wherewithal to
purchase them, broke through all the barriers which the laws of
Lycurgus opposed to their entrance into Lacedaemon. All the
sanguinary laws of the customs are not able to prevent the
importation of the teas of the Dutch and Gottenburg East India
comnpanies; because somewhat cheaper than those of the British
company. A pound of tea, however, is about a hundred times the
bulk of one of the highest prices, sixteen shillings, that is
commonly paid for it in silver, and more than two thousand times
the bulk of the same price in gold, and, consequently, just so
many times more difficult to smuggle.

It is partly owing to the easy transportation of gold and silver,
from the places where they abound to those where they are wanted,
that the price of those metals does not fluctuate continually,
like that of the greater part of other commodities, which are
hindered by their bulk from shifting their situation, when the
market happens to be either over or under-stocked with them. The
price of those metals, indeed, is not altogether exempted from
variation ; but the changes to which it is liable are generally
slow, gradual, and uniform. In Europe, for example, it is
supposed, without much foundation, perhaps, that during the
course of the present and preceding century, they have been
constantly, but gradually, sinking in their value, on account of
the continual importations from the Spanish West Indies. But to
make any sudden change in the price of gold and silver, so as to
raise or lower at once, sensibly and remarkably, the money price
of all other commodities, requires such a revolution in commerce
as that occasioned by the discovery of America.

If, not withstanding all this, gold and silver should at any time
fall short in a country which has wherewithal to purchase them,
there are more expedients for supplying their place, than that of
almost any other commodity. If the materials of manufacture are
wanted, industry must stop. If provisions are wanted, the people
must starve. But if money is wanted, barter will supply its
place, though with a good deal of inconveniency. Buying and
selling upon credit, and the different dealers compensating their
credits with one another, once a-month, or once a-year, will
supply it with less inconveniency. A well-regulated paper-money
will supply it not only without any inconveniency, but, in some
cases, with some advantages. Upon every account, therefore, the
attention of government never was so unnecessarily employed, as
when directed to watch over the preservation or increase of the
quantity of money in any country.

No complaint, however, is more common than that of a scarcity of
money. Money, like wine, must always be scarce with those who
have neither wherewithal to buy it, nor credit to borrow it.
Those who have either, will seldom be in want either of the
money, or of the wine which they have occasion for. This
complaint, however, of the scarcity of money, is not always
confined to improvident spendthrifts. It is sometimes general
through a  whole mercantile town and the country in its
neighbourhood. Over-trading is the common cause of it. Sober men,
whose projects have been disproportioned to their capitals, are
as likely to have neither wherewithal to buy money, nor credit to
borrow it, as prodigals, whose expense has been disproportioned
to their revenue. Before their projects can be brought to bear,
their stock is gone, and their credit with it. They run about
everywhere to borrow money, and everybody tells them that they
have none to lend. Even such general complaints of the scarcity
of money do not always prove that the usual number of gold and
silver pieces are not circulating in the country, but that many
people want those pieces who have nothing to give for them. When
the profits of trade happen to be greater than ordinary
over-trading becomes a general error, both among great and small
dealers. They do not always send more money abroad than usual,
but they buy upon credit, both at home and abroad, an unusual
quantity of goods, which they send to some distant market, in
hopes that the returns will come in before the demand for
payment. The demand comes before the returns, and they have
nothing at hand with which they can either purchase money or give
solid security for borrowing. It is not any scarcity of gold and
silver, but the difficulty which such people find in borrowing,
and which their creditor find in getting payment, that occasions
the general complaint of the scarcity of money.

It would be too ridiculous to go about seriously to prove, that
wealth does not consist in money, or in gold and silver ; but in
what money purchases, and is valuable only for purchasing. Money,
no doubt, makes always a part of the national capital ; but it
has already been shown that it generally makes but a small part,
and always the most unprofitable part of it.

It is not because wealth consists more essentially in money than
in goods, that the merchant finds it generally more easy to buy
goods with money, than to buy money with goods ; but because
money is the known and established instrument of commerce, for
which every thing is readily given in exchange, but which is not
always with equal readiness to be got in exchange for every
thing. The greater part of goods, besides, are more perishable
than money, and he may frequently sustain a much greater loss by
keeping them. When his goods are upon hand, too, he is more
liable to such demands for money as he may not be able to answer,
than when he has got their price in his coffers. Over and above
all this, his profit arises more directly from selling than from
buying; and he is, upon all these accounts, generally much more
anxious to exchange his goods for money than his money for goods.
But though a particular merchant, with abundance of goods in his
warehouse, may sometimes be ruined by not being able to sell them
in time, a nation or country is not liable to the same accident,
The whole capital of a merchant frequently consists in perishable
goods destined for purchasing money. But it is but a very small
part of the annual produce of the land and lahour of a country,
which can ever be destined for purchasing gold and silver from
their neighbours. The far greater part is circulated and consumed
among themselves; and even of the surplus which is sent abroad,
the greater part is generally destined for the purchase of other
foreign goods. Though gold and silver, therefore, could not be
had in exchange for the goods destined to purchase them, the
nation would not be ruined. It might, indeed, suffer some loss
and inconveniency, and be forced upon some of those expedients
which are necessary for supplying the place of money. The annual
produce of its land and labour, however, would be the same, or
very nearly the same as usual ; because the same, or very nearly
the same consumable capital would be employed in maintaining it.
And though goods do not always draw money so readily as money
draws goods, in the long-run they draw it more necessarily than
even it draws them. Goods can serve many other purposes besides
purchasing money, but money can serve no other purpose besides
purchasing goods. Money, therefore, necessarily runs after goods,
but goods do not always or necessarily run after money. The man
who buys, does not always mean to sell again, but frequently to
use or to consume ; whereas he who sells always means to buy
again. The one may frequently have done the whole, but the other
can never have done more than the one half of his business. It is
not for its own sake that men desire money, but for the sake of
what they can purchase with it.

Consumable commodities, it is said, are soon destroyed; whereas
gold and silver are of a more durable nature, and were it not for
this continual exportation, might be accumulated for ages
together, to the incredible augmentation of the real wealth of
the country. Nothing, therefore, it is pretended, can be more
disadvantageous to any country, than the trade which consists in
the exchange of such lasting for such perishable commodities. We
do not, however, reckon that trade disadvatageous, which consists
in the exchange of the hardware of England for the wines of
France, and yet hardware is a very durable commodity, and were it
not for this continual exportation, might too be accumulated for
ages together, to the incredible augmentation of the pots and
pans of the country. But it readily occurs, that the number of
such utensils is in every country necessarily limited by the use
which there is for them ; that it would be absurd to have more
pots and pans than were necessary for cooking the victuals
usually consumed there; and that, if the quantity of victuals
were to increase, the number of pots and pans would readily
increase along with it ; a part of the increased quantity of
victuals being employed in purchasing them, or in maintaining an
additional number of workmen whose business it was to make them.
It should as readily occur, that the quantity of gold and silver
is, in every country, limited by the use which there is for those
metals ; that their use consists in circulating commodities, as
coin, and in affording a species of household furniture, as
plate; that the quantity of coin in every country is regulated by
the value of the commodities which are to be circulated by it;
increase that value, and immediately a part of it will be sent
abroad to purchase, wherever it is to be had, the additional
quantity of coin requisite for circulating them : that the
quantity of plate is regulated by the number and wealth of those
private families who choose to indulge themselves in that sort of
magnificence; increase the number and wealth of such families,
and a part of this increased wealth will most probably be
employed in purchasing, wherever it is to be found, an additional
quantity of plate ; that to attempt to increase the wealth of any
country, either by introducing or by detaining in it an
unnecessary quantity of gold and silver, is as absurd as it would
be to attempt to increase the good cheer of private families, by
obliging them to keep an unnecessary number of kitchen utensils.
As the expense of purchasing those unnecessary utensils would
diminish, instead of increasing, either the quantity or goodness
of the family provisions; so the expense of purchasing an
unnecessary quantity of gold and silver must, in every country,
as necessarily diminish the wealth which feeds, clothes, and
lodges, which maintains and employs the people. Gold and silver,
whether in the shape of coin or of plate, are utensils, it must
he remembered, as much as the furniture of the kitchen. Increase
the use of them, increase the consumable commodities which are to
be circulated, managed, and prepared by means of them, and you
will infallibly increase the quantity ; but if you attempt by
extraordinary means to increase the quantity, you will as
infallibly diminish the use, and even the quantity too, which in
those metals can never be greater than what the use requires.
Were they ever to be accumulated beyond this quantity, their
transportation is so easy, and the loss which attends their lying
idle and unemployed so great, that no law could prevent their
being immediately sent out of the country.

It is not always necessary to accumulate gold and silver, in
order to enable a country to carry on foreign wars, and to
maintain fleets and armies in distant countries. Fleets and
armies are maintained, not with gold and silver, but with
consumable goods. The nation which, from the annual produce of
its domestic industry, from the annual revenue arising out of its
lands, and labour, and consumable stock, has wherewithal to
purchase those consumable goods in distant countries, can
maintain foreign wars there.

A nation may purchase the pay and provisions of an army in a
distant country three different ways ; by sending abroad either,
first, some part of its accumulated gold and silver ; or,
secondly, some part of the annual produce of its manufactures ;
or, last of all, some part of its annual rude produce.

The gold and silver which can properly be considered as
accumulated, or stored up in any country, may be distinguished
into three parts ; first, the circulating money; secondly, the
plate of private families; and, last of all, the money which may
have been collected by many years parsimony, and laid up in the
treasury of the prince.

It can seldom happen that much can be spared from the circulating
money of the country ; because in that there can seldom be much
redundancy. The value of goods annually bought and sold in any
country requires a certain quantity of money to circulate and
distribute them to their proper consumers, and can give
employment to no more. The channel of circulation necessarily
draws to itself a sum sufficient to fill it, and never admits any
more. Something, however, is generally withdrawn from this
channel in the case of foreign war. By the great number of people
who are maintained abroad, fewer are maintained at home. Fewer
goods are circulated there, and less money becomes necessary to
circulate them. An extraordinary quantity of paper money of some
sort or other, too, such as exchequer notes, navy bills, and bank
bills, in England, is generally issued upon such occasions, and,
by supplying the place of circulating gold and silver, gives an
opportunity of sending a greater quantity of it abroad. All this,
however, could afford but a poor resource for maintaining a
foreign war, of great expense, and several years duration.

The melting down of the plate of private families has, upon every
occasion, been found a still more insignificant one. The French,
in the beginning of the last war, did not derive so much
advantage from this expedient as to compensate the loss of the
fashion.

The accumulated treasures of the prince have in former times
afforded a much greater and more lasting resource. In the present
times, if you except the king of Prussia, to accumulate treasure
seems to be no part of the policy of European princes.

The funds which maintained the foreign wars of the present
century, the most expensive perhaps which history records, seem
to have had little dependency upon the exportation either of the
circulating money, or of the  plate of private families, or of
the treasure of the prince. The last French war cost Great
Britain upwards of 90,000,000, including not only the
75,000,000 of new debt that was contracted, but the additional
2s. in the pound land-tax, and what was annually borrowed of the
sinking fund. More than two-thirds of this expense were laid out
in distant countries; in Germany, Portugal, America, in the ports
of the Mediterranean, in the East and West Indies. The kings of
England had no accumulated treasure. We never heard of any
extraordinary quantity of plate being melted down. The
circulating gold and silver of the country had not been supposed
to exceed 18,000,000. Since the late recoinage of the gold,
however, it is believed to have been a good deal under-rated. Let
us suppose, therefore, according to the most exaggerated
computation which I remember to have either seen or heard of,
that, gold and silver together, it amounted to 30,000,000. Had
the war been carried on by means of our money, the whole of it
must, even according to this computation, have been sent out and
returned again, at least twice in a period of between six and
seven years. Should this be supposed, it would afford the most
decisive argument, to demonstrate how unnecessary it is for
government to watch over the preservation of money, since, upon
this supposition, the whole money of the country must have gone
from it, and returned to it again, two different times in so
short a period, without any body's knowing any thing of the
matter. The channel of circulation, however, never appeared more
empty than usual during any part of this period. Few people
wanted money who had wherewithal to pay for it. The profits of
foreign trade, indeed, were greater than usual during the whole
war, but especially towards the end of it. This occasioned, what
it always occasions, a general over-trading in all the ports of
Great Britain; and this again occasioned the usual complaint of
the scarcity of money, which always follows over-trading. Many
people wanted it, who had neither wherewithal to buy it, nor
credit to borrow it ; and because the debtors found it difficult
to borrow, the creditors found it difficult to get payment. Gold
and silver, however, were generally to be had for their value, by
those who had that value to give for them.

The enormous expense of the late war, therefore, must have been
chiefly defrayed, not by the exportation of gold and silver, but
by that of British commodities of some kind or other. When the
government, or those who acted under them, contracted with a
merchant for a remittance to some foreign country, he would
naturally endeavour to pay his foreign correspondent, upon whom
he granted a bill, by sending abroad rather commodities than gold
and silver. If the commodities of Great Britain were not in
demand in that  country, he would endeavour to send them to some
other country in which he could purchase a bill upon that
country. The transportation of commodities, when properly suited
to the market, is always attended with a considerable profit;
whereas that of gold and silver is scarce ever attended with any.
When those metals are sent abroad in order to purchase foreign
commodities, the merchant's profit arises, not from the purchase,
but from the sale of the returns. But when they are sent abroad
merely to pay a debt, he gets no returns, and consequently no
profit. He naturally, therefore, exerts his invention to find out
a way of paying his foreign debts, rather by the exportation of
commodities, than by that of gold and silver. The great quantity
of British goods, exported during the course of the late war,
without bringing back any returns, is accordingly remarked by the
author of the Present State of the Nation.

Besides the three sorts of gold and silver above mentioned, there
is in all great commercial countries a good deal of bullion
alternately imported and exported, for the purposes of foreign
trade. This bullion, as it circulates among different commercial
countries, in the same manner as the national coin circulates in
every country, may be considered as the money of the great
mercantile republic. The national coin receives its movement and
direction from the commodities circulated within the precincts of
each particular country ; the money in the mercantile republic,
from those circulated between different countries. Both are
employed in facilitating exchanges, the one between different
individuals of the same, the other between those of different
nations. Part of this money of the great mercantile republic may
have been, and probably was, employed in carrying on the late
war. In time of a general war, it is natural to suppose that a
movement and direction should be impressed upon it, different
from what it usually follows in profound peace, that it should
circulate more about the seat of the war, and be more employed in
purchasing there, and in the neighbouring countries, the pay and
provisions of the different armies. But whatever part of this
money of the mercantile republic Great Britain may have annually
employed in this manner, it must have been annually purchased,
either with British commodities, or with something else that had
been purchased with them ; which still brings us back to
commodities, to the annual produce of the land and labour of the
country, as the ultimate resources which enabled us to carry on
the war. It is natural, indeed, to suppose, that so great an
annual expense must have been defrayed from a great annual
produce. The expense of 1761, for example, amounted to more than
19,000,000. No accumulation could have supported so great an
annual profusion. There is no annual produce, even of gold and
silver, which could have supported it.     The whole gold and
silver annually imported into both Spain and Portugal, according
to the best accounts, does not commonly much exceed 6,000,000
sterling, which, in some years, would scarce have paid four
months expense of the late war.

The commodities most proper for being transported to distatnt
countries, in order to purchase there either the pay and
provisions of an army, or some part of the money of the
mercantile republic to be employed in purchasing them, seem to be
the finer and more improved manufactures; such as contain a great
value in a small bulk, and can therefore be exported to a great
distance at little expense. A country whose industry produces a
great annual surplus of such manufactures, which are usually
exported to foreign countries, may carry on for many years a very
expensive foreign war, without either exporting any considerable
quantity of gold and silver, or even having any such quantity to
export. A considerable part of the annual surplus of its
manufactures must, indeed, in this case, be exported without
bringing back any returns to the country, though it does to the
merchant ; the government purchasing of the merchant his bills
upon foreign countries, in order to purchase there the pay and
provisions of an army. Some part of this surplus, however, may
still continue to bring back a return. The manufacturers during;
the war will have a double demand upon them, and be called upon
first to work up goods to be sent abroad, for paying the bills
drawn upon foreign countries for the pay and provisions of the
army: and, secondly, to work up such as are necessary for
purchasing the common returns that had usually been consumed in
the country. In the midst of the most destructive foreign war,
therefore, the greater part of manufactures may frequently
flourish greatly; and, on the contrary, they may decline on the
return of peace. They may flourish amidst the ruin of their
country, and begin to decay upon the return of its prosperity.
The different state of many different branches of the British
manufactures during the late war, and for some time after the
peace, may serve as an illustration of what has been just now
said.

No foreign war, of great expense or duration, could conveniently
be carried on by the exportation of the rude produce of the soil.
The expense of sending such a quantity of it into a foreign
country as might purchase the pay and provisions of an army would
be too great. Few countries, too, produce much more rude produce
than what is sufficient for the subsistence of their own
inhabitants. To send abroad any great quantity of it, therefore,
would be to send abroad a part of the necessary subsistence of
the people. It is otherwise with the exportation of manufactures.
The maintenance of the people employed in them is kept at home,
and only the surplus part of their work is exported. Mr Hume
frequently takes notice of the inability of the ancient kings of
England to carry on, without interruption, any foreign war of
long duration. The English in those days had nothing wherewithal
to purchase the pay and provisions of their armies in foreign
countries, but either the rude produce of the soil, of which no
considerable part could be spared from the home consumption, or a
few manufactures of the coarsest kind, of which, as well as of
the rude produce, the transportation was too expensive. This
inability did not arise from the want of money, but of the finer
and more improved manufactures. Buying and selling was transacted
by means of money in England then as well as now. The quantity of
circulating money must have borne the same proportion, to the
number and value of purchases and sales usually transacted at
that time, which it does to those transacted at present ; or,
rather, it must have borne a greater proportion, because there
was then no paper, which now occupies a great part of the
employment of gold and silver. Among nations to whom commerce and
manufactures are little known, the sovereign, upon extraordinary
occasions, can seldom draw any considerable aid from his
subjects, for reasons which shall be explained hereafter. It is
in such countries, therefore, that he generally endeavours to
accumulate a treasure, as the only resource against such
emergencies. Independent of this necessity, he is, in such a
situation, naturally disposed to the parsimony requisite for
accumulation. In that simple state, the expense even of a
sovereign is not directed by the vanity which delights in the
gaudy finery of a court, but is employed in bounty to his
tenants, and hospitality to his retainers. But bounty and
hospitality very seldom lead to extravagance; though vanity
almost always does.     Every Tartar chief, accordingly, has a
treasure. The treasures of Mazepa, chief of the Cossacks in the
Ukraine, the famous ally of Charles XII., are said to have been
very great. The French kings of the Merovingian race had all
treasures. When they divided their kingdom among their different
children, they divided their treasures too. The Saxon princes,
and the first kings after the Conquest, seem likewise to have
accumulated treasures. The first exploit of every new reign was
commonly to seize the treasure of the preceding king, as the most
essential measure for securing the succession. The sovereigns of
improved and commercial countries are not under the same
necessity of accummlating treasures, because they can generally
draw from their subjects extraordinary aids upon extraordinary
occasions. They are likewise less disposed to do so. They
naturally, perhaps necessarily, follow the mode of the times ;
and their expense comes to be regulated by the same extravagant
vanity which directs that of all the other great proprietors in
their dominions. The insignificant pageantry of their court
becomes every day more brilliant; and the expense of it not only
prevents accumulation, but frequently encroaches upon the funds
destined for more necessary expenses. What Dercyllidas said of
the court of Persia, may be applied to that of several European
princes, that he saw there much splendour, but little strength,
and many servants, but few soldiers.

The importation of gold and silver is not the principal, much
less the sole benefit, which a nation derives from its foreign
trade. Between whatever places foreign trade is carried on, they
all of them derive two distinct benefits from it. It carries out
that surplus part of the produce of their land and labour for
which there is no demand among them, and brings back in return
for it something else for which there is a demand. It gives a
value to their superfluities, by exchanging them for something
else, which may satisfy a part of their wants and increase their
enjoyments. By means of it, the narrowness of the home market
does not hinder the division of labour in any particular branch
of art or manufacture from being carried to the highest
perfection. By opening a more extensive market for whatever part
of the produce of their labour may exceed the home consumption,
it encourages them to improve its productive power, and to
augment its annual produce to the utmost, and thereby to increase
the real revenue and wealth of the society. These great and
important services foreign trade is continually occupied in
performing to all the different countries between which it is
carried on. They all derive great benefit from it, though that in
which the merchant resides generally derives the greatest, as he
is generally more employed in supplying the wants, and carrying
out the superfluities of his own, than of any other particular
country. To import the gold and silver which may be wanted into
the countries which have no mines, is, no doubt a part of the
business of foreign commerce. It is, however, a most
insignificant part of it. A country which carried on foreign
trade merely upon this account, could scarce have occasion to
freight a ship in a century.

It is not by the importation of gold and silver that the
discovery of America has enriched Europe. By the abundance of the
American mines, those metals have become cheaper. A service of
plate can now be purchased for about a third part of the corn, or
a third part of the labour, which it would have cost in the
fifteenth century. With the same annual expense of labour and
commodities, Europe can annually purchase about three times the
quantity of plate which it could have purchased at that time. But
when a commodity comes to be sold for a third part of what bad
been its usual price, not only those who purchased it before can
purchase three times their former quantity, but it is brought
down to the level of a much greater number of purchasers, perhaps
to more than ten, perhaps to more than twenty times the former
number. So that there may be in Europe at present, not only more
than three times, but more than twenty or thirty times the
quantity of plate which would have been in it, even in its
present state of improvement, had the discovery of the American
mines never been made. So far Europe has, no doubt, gained a real
conveniency, though surely a very trifling one. The cheapness of
gold and silver renders those metals rather less fit for the
purposes of money than they were before. In order to make the
same purchases, we must load ourselves with a greater quantity of
them, and carry about a shilling in our pocket, where a groat
would have done before. It is difficult to say which is most
trifling, this inconveniency, or the opposite conveniency.
Neither the one nor the other could have made any very essential
change in the state of Europe. The discovery of America, however,
certainly made a most essential one. By opening a new and
inexhaustible market to all the commodities of Europe, it gave
occasion to new divisions of labour and improvements of art,
which in the narrow circle of the ancient commerce could never
have taken place, for want of a market to take off the greater
part of their produce. The productive powers of labour were
improved, and its produce increased in all the different
countries of Europe, and together with it the real revenue and
wealth of the inhabitants. The commodities of Europe were almost
all new to America, and many of those of America were new to
Europe. A new set of exchanges, therefore, began to take place,
which had never been thought of before, and which should
naturally have proved as advantageous to the new, as it certainly
did to the old continent. The savage injustice of the Europeans
rendered an event, which ought to have been beneficial to all,
ruinous and destructive to several of those unfortunate
countries.

The discovery of a passage to the East Indies by the Cape of Good
Hope, which happened much about the same time, opened perhaps a
still more extensive range to foreign commerce, than even that of
America, notwithstanding the greater distance. There were but two
nations in America, in any respect, superior to the savages, and
these were destroyed almost as soon as discovered. The rest were
mere savages. But the empires of China, Indostan, Japan, as well
as several others in the East Indies, without having richer mines
of gold or silver, were, in every other respect, much richer,
better cultivated, and more advanced in all arts and
manufactures, than either Mexico or Peru, even though we should
credit, what plainly deserves no credit, the exaggerated accounts
of the Spanish writers concerning the ancient state of those
empires. But rich and civilized nations can always exchange to a
much greater value with one another, than with savages and
barbarians. Europe, however, has hitherto derived much less
advantage from its commerce with the East Indies, than from that
with America. The Portuguese monopolized the East India trade to
themselves for about a century ; and it was only indirectly, and
through them, that the other nations of Europe could either send
out or receive any goods from that country. When the Dutch, in
the beginning of the last century, began to encroach upon them,
they vested their whole East India commerce in an exclusive
company. The English, French, Swedes, and Danes, have all
followed their example; so that no great nation of Europe has
ever yet had the benefit of a free commerce to the East Indies.
No other reason need be assigned why it has never been so
advantageous as the trade to America, which, between almost every
nation of Europe and its own colonies, is free to all its
subjects. The exclusive privileges of those East India companies,
their great riches, the great favour and protection which these
have procured them from their respective governments, have
excited much envy against them. This envy has frequently
represented their trade as altogether pernicious, on account of
the great quantities of silver which it every year exports from
the countries from which it is carried on. The parties concerned
have replied, that their trade by this continual exportation of
silver, might indeed tend to impoverish Europe in general, but
not the particular country from which it was carried on ;
because, by the exportation of a part of the returns to other
European countries, it annually brought home a much greater
quantity of that metal than it carried out. Both the objection
and the reply are founded in the popular notion which I have been
just now examining. It is therefore unnecessary to say any thing
further about either. By the annual exportation of silver to the
East Indies, plate is probably somrwhat dearer in Europe than it
otherwise might have been ; and coined silver probably purchases
a larger quantity both of labour and commodities. The former of
these two effects is a very small loss, the latter a very small
advantage ; both too insignificant to deserve any part of the
public attention. The trade to the East Indies, by opening a
market to the commodities of Europe, or, what comes nearly to the
same thing, to the gold and silver which is purchased with those
commodities, must necessarily tend to increase the annual
production of European commodities, and consequently the real
wealth and revenue of Europe. That it has hitherto increased them
so little, is probably owing to the restraints which it
everywhere labours under.

I thought it necessary, though at the hazard of being tedious, to
examine at full length this popular notion, that wealth consists
in money or in gold and silver. Money, in common language, as I
have already observed, frequently signifies wealth ; and this
ambiguity of expression has rendered this popular notion so
familiar to us, that even they who are convinced of its
absurdity, are very apt to forget their own principles, and, in
the course of their reasonings, to take it for granted as a
certain and undeniable truth. Some of the best English writers
upon commerce set out with observing, that the wealth of a
country consists, not in its gold and silver only, but in its
lands, houses, and consumable goods of all different kinds. In
the course of their reasonings, however, the lands, houses, and
consumable goods, seem to slip out of their memory; and the
strain of their argument frequently supposes that all wealth
consists in gold and silver, and that to multiply those metals is
the great object of national industry and commerce.

The two principles being established, however, that wealth
consisted in gold and silver, and that those metals could be
brought into a country which had no mines, only by the balance of
trade, or by exporting to a greater value than it imported ; it
necessarily became the great object of political economy to
diminish as much as possible the importation of foreign goods for
home consumption, and to increase as much as possible the
exportation of the produce of domestic industry. Its two great
engines for enriching the country, therefore, were restraints
upon importation, and encouragement to exportation.

The restraints upon importation were of two kinds.

First, restraints upon the importation of such foreign goods for
home consumption as could be produced at home, from whatever
country they were imported.

Secondly, restraints upon the importation of goods of almost all
kinds, from those particular countries with which the balance of
trade was supposed to be disadvantageous.

Those different restraints consisted sometimes in high duties,
and sometimes in absolute prohibitions.

Exportation was encouraged sometimes by drawbacks, sometimes by
bounties, sometimes by advantageous treaties of commerce with
foreign states, and sometimes by the establishment of colonies in
distant countries.

Drawbacks were given upon two different occasions. When the home
manufactures were subject to any duty or excise, either the whole
or a part of it was frequently drawn back upon their exportation
; and when foreign goods liable to a duty were imported, in order
to be exported again, either the whole or a part of this duty was
sometimes given back upon such exportation.

Bounties were given for the encouragemnent, either of some
beginning manufactures, or of such sorts of industry of other
kinds as were supposed to deserve particular favour.

By advantageous treaties of commerce, particular privileges were
procured in some foreign state for the goods and merchants of the
country, beyond what were granted to those of other countries.

By the establishment of colonies in distant countries, not only
particular privileges, but a monopoly was frequently procured for
the goods and merchants of the country which established them.

The two sorts of restraints upon importation above mentioned,
together with these four encouragements to exportation,
constitute the six principal means by which the commercial system
proposes to increase the quantity of gold and silver in any
country, by turning the balance of trade in its favour. I shall
consider each of them in a particular chapter, and, without
taking much farther notice of their supposed tendency to bring
money into the country, I shall examine chiefly what are likely
to be the effects of each of them upon the annual produce of its
industry. According as they tend either to increase or diminish
the value of this annual produce, they must evidently tend either
to increase or diminish the real wealth and revenue of the
country.



CHAPTER   II.

OF RESTRAINTS UPON IMPORTATION FROM FOREIGN COUNTRIES OF SUCH
GOODS AS CAN BE PRODUCED AT HOME.

By restraining, either by high duties, or by absolute
prohibitions, the importation of such goods from foreign
countries as can be produced at home, the monopoly of the home
market is more or less secured to the domestic industry employed
in producing them. Thus the prohibition of importing either live
cattle or salt provisions from foreign countries, secures to the
graziers of Great Britain the monopoly of the home market for
butcher's meat. The high duties upon the importation of corn,
which, in times of moderate plenty, amount to a prohibition, give
a like advantage to the growers of that commodity. The
prohibition of the importation of foreign woollen is equally
favourable to the woollen manufacturers. The silk manufacture,
though altogether employed upon foreign materials, has lately
obtained the same advantage. The linen manufacture has not yet
obtained it, but is making great strides towards it. Many other
sorts of manufactures have, in the same manner obtained in Great
Britain, either altogether, or very nearly, a monopoly against
their countrymen. The variety of goods, of which the importation
into Great Britain is prohibited, either absolutely, or under
certain circumstances, greatly exceeds what can easily be
suspected by those who are not well acquainted with the laws of
the customs.

That this monopoly of the home market frequently gives great
encouragement to that particular species of industry which enjoys
it, and frequently turns towards that employment a greater share
of both the labour and stock of the society than would otherwise
have gone to it, cannot be doubted. But whether it tends either
to increase the general industry of the society, or to give it
the most advantageous direction, is not, perhaps, altogether so
evident.

The general industry of the society can never exceed what the
capital of the society can employ. As the number of workmen that
can be kept in employment by any particular person must bear a
certain proportion to his capital, so the number of those that
can be continually employed by all the members of a great society
must bear a certain proportion to the whole capital of the
society, and never can exceed that proportion. No regulation of
commerce can increase the quantity of industry in any society
beyond what its capital can maintain. It can only divert a part
of it into a direction into which it might not otherwise have
gone; and it is by no means certain that this artificial
direction is likely to be more advantageous to the society, than
that into which it would have gone of its own accord.

Every individual is continually exerting himself to find out the
most advantageous employment for whatever capital he can command.
It is his own advantage, indeed, and not that of the society,
which he has in view. But the study of his own advantage
naturally, or rather necessarily, leads him to prefer that
employment which is most advantageous to the society.

First, every individual endeavours to employ his capital as near
home as he can, and consequently as much as he can in the support
of domestic industry, provided always that he can thereby obtain
the ordinary, or not a great deal less than the ordinary profits
of stock.

Thus, upon equal, or nearly equal profits, every wholesale
merchant naturally prefers the home trade to the foreign trade of
consumption, and the foreign trade of consumption to the carrying
trade. In the home trade, his capital is never so long out of his
sight as it frequently is in the foreign trade of consumption. He
can know better the character and situation of the persons whom
he trusts; and if he should happen to be deceived, he knows
better the laws of the country from which he must seek redress.
In the carrying trade, the  capital of the merchant is, as it
were, divided between two foreign countries, and no part of it is
ever necessarily brought home, or placed under his own immediate
view and command. The capital which an Amsterdam merchant employs
in carrying corn from Koningsberg to Lisbon, and fruit and wine
from Lisbon to Koningsberg, must generally be the one half of it
at Koningsberg, and the other half at Lisbon. No part of it need
ever come to Amsterdam. The natural residence of such a merchant
should either be at Koningsberg or Lisbon ; and it can only be
some very particular circumstances which can make him prefer the
residence of Amsterdam. The uneasiness, however, which he feels
at being separated so far from his capital, generally determines
him to bring part both of the Koningsberg goods which he destines
for the market of Lisbon, and of the Lisbon goods which he
destines for that of Koningsberg, to Amsterdam ; and though this
necessarily subjects him to a double charge of loading and
unloading as well as to the payment of some duties and customs,
yet, for the sake of having some part of his capital always under
his own view and command, he willingly submits to this
extraordinary charge; and it is in this manner that every country
which has any considerable share of the carrying trade, becomes
always the emporium, or general market, for the goods of all the
different countries whose trade it carries on. The merchant, in
order to save a second loading and unloading, endeavours always
to sell in the home market, as much of the goods of all those
different countries as he can; and thus, so far as he can, to
convert his carrying trade into a foreign trade of consumption. A
merchant, in the same manner, who is engaged in the foreign trade
of consumption, when he collects goods for foreign markets, will
always be glad, upon equal or nearly equal profits, to sell as
great a part of them at home as he can. He saves himself the risk
and trouble of exportation, when, so far as he can, he thus
converts his foreign trade of consumption into a home trade. Home
is in this manner the centre, if I may say so, round which the
capitals of the inhabitants of every country are continually
circulating, and towards which they are always tending, though,
by particular causes, they may sometimes be driven off and
repelled from it towards more distant employments. But a capital
employed in the home trade, it has already been shown,
necessarily puts into motion a greater quantity of domestic
industry, and gives revenue and employment to a greater number of
the inhabitants of the country, than an equal capital employed in
the foreign trade of consumption; and one employed in the foreign
trade of consumption has the same advantage over an equal capital
employed in the carrying trade. Upon equal, or only nearly equal
profits, therefore, every individual naturally inclines to employ
his capital in the manner in which it is likely to afford the
greatest support to domestic industry, and to give revenue and
employment to the greatest number of people of his own country.

Secondly, every individual who employs his capital in the support
of domestic industry, necessarily endeavours so to direct that
industry, that its produce may be of the greatest possible value.

The produce of industry is what it adds to the subject or
materials upon which it is employed. In proportion as the value
of this produce is great or small, so will likewise be the
profits of the employer. But it is only for the sake of profit
that any man employs a capital in the support of industry; and he
will always, therefore, endeavour to employ it in the support of
that industry of which the produce is likely to be of the
greatest value, or to exchange for the greatest quantity either
of money or of other goods.

But the annual revenue of every society is always precisely equal
to the exchangeable value of the whole annual produce of its
industry, or rather is precisely the same thing with that
exchangeable value. As every individual, therefore, endeavours as
much as he can, both to employ his capital in the support of
domestic industry, and so to direct that industry that its
produce maybe of the greatest value; every individual necessarily
labours to render the annual revenue of the society as great as
he can. He generally, indeed, neither intends to promote the
public interest, nor knows how much he is promoting it. By
preferring the support of domestic to that of foreign industry,
he intends only his own security ; and by directing that industry
in such a manner as its produce may be of the greatest value, he
intends only his own gain; and he is in this, as in many other
cases, led by an invisible hand to promote an end which was no
part of his intention. Nor is it always the worse for the society
that it was no part of it. By pursuing his own interest, he
frequently promotes that of the society more effectually than
when he really intends to promote it. I have never known much
good done by those who affected to trade for the public good. It
is an affectation, indeed, not very common among merchants, and
very few words need be employed in dissuading them from it.

What is the species of domestic industry which his capital can
employ, and of which the produce is likely to be of the greatest
value, every individual, it is evident, can in his local
situation judge much better than any statesman or lawgiver can do
for him. The statesmn, who should attempt to direct private
people in what manner they ought to employ their capitals, would
not only load himself with a most unnecessary attention, but
assume an authority which could safely be trusted, not only to no
single person, but to no council or senate whatever. and which
would nowhere be so dangerous as in the hands of a man who had
folly and presumption enough to fancy himself fit to exercise it.

To give the monopoly of the home market to the produce of
domestic industry, in any particular art or manufacture, is in
some measure to direct private people in what manner they ought
to employ their capitals, and must in almost all cases be either
a useless or a hurtful regulation. If the produce of domestic can
be brought there as cheap as that of foreign industry, the
regulation is evidently useless. If it cannot, it must generally
be hurtful. It is the maxim of every prudent master of a family,
never to attempt to make at home what it will cost him more to
make than to buy. The tailor does not attempt to make his own
shoes, but buys them of the shoemaker. The shoemaker does not
attempt to make his own clothes, but employs a tailor. The farmer
attempts to make neither the one nor the other, but employs those
different artificers. All of them find it for their interest to
employ their whole industry in a way in which they have some
advantage over their neighbours, and to purchase with a part of
its produce, or, what is the same thing, with the price of a part
of it, whatever else they have occasion for.

What is prudence in the conduct of every private family, can
scarce be folly In that of a great kingdom. If a foreign country
can supply us with a commodity cheaper than we ourselves can make
it, better buy it of them with some part of the produce of our
own industry, employed in a way in which we have some advantage.
The general industry of the country being always in proportion to
the capital which employs it, will not thereby be diminished, no
more than that of the abovementioned artificers; but only left to
find out the way in which it can be employed with the greatest
advantage. It is certainly not employed to the greatest
advantage, when it is thus directed towards an object which it
can buy cheaper than it can make. The value of its annual produce
is certainly more or less diminished, when it is thus turned away
from producing commodities evidently of more value than the
commodity which it is directed to produce. According to the
supposition, that commodity could be purchased from foreign
countries cheaper than it can be made at home ; it could
therefore have been purchased with a part only of the
commodities, or, what is the same thing, with a part only of the
price of the commodities, which the industry employed by an equal
capital would have produced at home, had it been left to follow
its natural course. The industry of the country, therefore, is
thus turned away from a more to a less advantageous employment ;
and the exchangeable value of its annual produce, instead of
being increased, according to the intention of the lawgiver, must
necessarily be diminished by every such regulation.

By means of such regulations, indeed, a particular manufacture
may sometimes be acquired sooner than it could have been
otherwise, and after a certain time may be made at home as cheap,
or cheaper, than in the foreign country. But though the industry
of the society may be thus carried with advantage into a
particular channel sooner than it could have been otherwise, it
will by no means follow that the sum-total, either of its
industry, or of its revenue, can ever be augmented by any such
regulation. The industry of the society can augment only in
proportion as its capital augments, and its capital can augment
only in proportion to what can be gradually saved out of its
revenue. But the immediate effect of every such regulation is to
diminish its revenue; and what diminishes its revenue is
certainly not very likely to augment its capital faster than it
would have augmented of its own accord, had both capital and
industry been left to find out their natural employments.

Though, for want of such regulations, the society should never
acquire the proposed manufacture, it would not upon that account
necessarily be the poorer in anyone period of its duration. In
every period of its duration its whole capital and industry might
still have been employed, though upon different objects, in the
manner that was most advantageous at the time. In every period
its revenue might have been the greatest which its capital could
afford, and both capital and revenue might have been augmented
with the greatest possible rapidity.

The natural advantages which one country has over another, in
producing particular commodities, are sometimes so great, that it
is acknowledged by all the world to be in vain to struggle with
them. By means of glasses, hot-beds, and hot-walls, very good
grapes can be raised in Scotland, and very good wine, too, can be
made of them, at about thirty times the expense for which at
least equally good can be brought from foreign countries. Would
it be a reasonable law to prohibit the importation of all foreign
wines, merely to encourage the making of claret and Burgundy in
Scotland ? But if there would be a manifest absurdity in turning
towards any employment thirty times more of the capital and
industry of the country than would be necessary to purchase from
foreign countries an equal quantity of the commodities wanted,
there must be an absurdity, though not altogether so glaring, yet
exactly of the same kind, in turning towards any such employment
a thirtieth, or even a three hundredth part more of either.
Whether the advantages which one country has over another be
natural or acquired, is in this respect of no consequence. As
long as the one country has those advantages, and the other wants
them, it will always be more advantageous for the latter rather
to buy of the former than to make. It is an acquired advantage
only, which one artificer has over his neighbour, who exercises
another trade; and yet they both find it more advantageous to buy
of one another, than to make what does not belong to their
particular trades.

Merchants and manufacturers are the people who derive the
greatest advantage from this monopoly of the home market The
prohibition of the importation of foreign cattle and of salt
provisions, together with the high duties upon foreign corn,
which in times of moderate plenty amount to a prohibition, are
not near so advantageous to the graziers and farmers of Great
Britain, as other regulations of the same kind are to its
merchants and manufacturers. Manufactures, those of the finer
kind especially, are more easily transported from one country to
another than corn or cattle. It is in the fetching and carrying
manufactures, accordingly, that foreign trade is chiefly
employed. In manufactures, a very small advantage will enable
foreigners to undersell our own workmen, even in the home market.
It will require a very great one to enable them to do so in the
rude produce of the soil. If the free importation of foreign
manufactures were permitted, several of the home manufactures
would probably suffer,and some of them perhaps go to ruin
altogether, and a considerable part of the stock and industry at
present employed in them, would be forced to find out some other
employment. But the freest importation of the rude produce of the
soil could have no such effect upon the agriculture of the
country.

If the importation of foreign cattle, for example, were made ever
so free, so few could be imported, that the grazing trade of
Great Britain could be little affected by it. Live cattle are,
perhaps, the only commodity of which the transportation is more
expensive by sea than by land. By land they carry themselves to
market. By sea, not only the cattle, but their food and their
water too, must be carried at no small expense and inconveniency.
The short sea between Ireland and Great Britain, indeed, renders
the importation of Irish cattle more easy. But though the free
importation of them, which was lately permitted only for a
limited time, were rendered perpetual, it could have no
considerable effect upon the interest of the graziers of Great
Britain. Those parts of Great Britain which border upon the Irish
sea are all grazing countries. Irish cattle could never be
imported for their use, but must be drove through those very
extensive countries, at no small expense and inconveniency,
before they could arrive at their proper market. Fat cattle could
not be drove so far. Lean cattle, therefore, could only be
imported; and such importation could interfere not with the
interest of the feeding or fattening countries, to which, by
reducing the price of lean cattle it would rather be
advantageous, but with that of the breeding countries only. The
small number of Irish cattle imported since their importation was
permitted, together with the good price at which lean cattle
still continue to sell, seem to demonstrate, that even the
breeding countries of Great Britain are never likely to be much
affected by the free importation of Irish cattle. The common
people of Ireland, indeed, are said to have sometimes opposed
with violence the exportation of their cattle. But if the
exporters had found any great advantage in continuing the trade,
they could easily, when the law was on their side, have conquered
this mobbish opposition.

Feeding and fattening countries, besides, must always be highly
improved, whereas breeding countries are generally uncultivated.
The high price of lean cattle, by augmenting the value of
uncultivated land, is like a bounty against improvement. To any
country which was highly improved throughout, it would be more
advantageous to import its lean cattle than to breed them. The
province of Holland, accordingly, is said to follow this maxim at
present. The mountains of Scotland, Wales, and Northumberland,
indeed, are countries not capable of much improvement, and seem
destined by nature to be the breeding countries of Great Britain.
The freest importation of foreign cattle could have no other
effect than to hinder those breeding countries from taking
advantage of the increasing population and improvement of the
rest of the kingdom, from raising their price to an exorbitant
height, and from laying a real tax upon all the more improved and
cultivated parts of the country.

The freest importation of salt provisions, in the same manner,
could have as little effect upon the interest of the graziers of
Great Britain as that of live cattle. Salt provisions are not
only a very bulky commodity, but when compared with fresh meat
they are a commodity both of worse quality, and, as they cost
more labour and expense, of higher price. They could never,
therefore, come into competition with the fresh meat, though they
might with the salt provisions of the country. They might be used
for victualling ships for distant voyages, and such like uses,
but could never make any considerable part of the food of the
people. The small quantity of salt provisions imported from
Ireland since their importation was rendered free, is an
experimental proof that our graziers have nothing to apprehend
from it.     It does not appear that the price of butchet's meat
has ever been sensibly affected by it.

Even the free importation of foreign corn could very little
affect the interest of the farmers of Great Britain. Corn is a
much more bulky commodity than butcher's meat. A pound of wheat
at a penny is as dear as a pound of butcher's meat at fourpence.
The small quantity of foreign corn imported even in times of the
greatest scarcity, may satisfy our farmers that they can have
nothing to fear from the freest importation. The average quantity
imported, one year with another, amounts only, according to the
very well informed author of the Tracts upon the Corn Trade, to
23,728 quarters of all sorts of grain, and does not exceed the
five hundredth and seventy-one part of the annual consumption.
But as the bounty upon corn occasions a greater exportation in
years of plenty, so it must, of consequence, occasion a greater
importation in years of scarcity, than in the actual state of
tillage would otherwise take place. By means of it, the plenty of
one year does not compensate the scarcity of another; and as the
average quantity exported is necessarily augmented by it, so must
likewise, in the actual state of tillage, the average quantity
imported. If there were no bounty, as less corn would be
exported, suit is probable that, one year with another, less
would be imported than at present. The corn-merchants, the
fetchers and carriers of corn between Great Britain and foreign
countries, would have much less employment, and might suffer
considerably ; but the country gentlemen and farmers could suffer
very little. It is in the corn-merchants, accordingly, rather
than the country gentlemen and farmers, that I have observed the
greatest anxiety for the renewal and continuation of the bounty.

Country gentlemen and farmers are, to their great honour, of all
people, the least subject to the wretched spirit of monopoly. The
undertaker of a great manufactory is sometimes alarmed if another
work of the same kind is established within twenty miles of him;
the Dutch undertaker of the woollen manufacture at Abbeville,
stipulated that no work of the same kind should be established
within thirty leagues of that city. Farmers and country
gentlemen, on the contrary, are generally disposed rather to
promote, than to obstruct, the cultivation and improvement of
their neighbours farms and estates. They have no secrets, such as
those of the greater part of manufacturers, but are generally
rather fond of communicating to their neighbours, and of
extending as far as possible any new practice which they may have
found to be advantageous. "Pius quaestus", says old Cato,
"stabilissimusque, minimeque invidiosus; minimeque male
cogitantes sunt, qui in eo studio occupati sunt." Country
gentlemen and farmers, dispersed in different parts of the
country, cannot so easily combine as merchants and manufacturers,
who being collected into towns, and accustomed to that exclusive
corporation spirit which prevails in them, naturally endeavour to
obtain, against all their countrymen, the same exclusive
privilege which they generally possess against the inhabitants of
their respective towns. They accordingly seem to have been the
original inventors of those restraints upon the importation of
foreign goods, which secure to them the monopoly of the home
market. It was probably in imitation of them, and to put
themselves upon a level with those who, they found, were disposed
to oppress them, that the country gentlemen and farmers of Great
Britain so far forgot the generosity which is natural to their
station, as to demand the exclusive privilege of supplying their
countrymen with corn and butcher's meat. They did not, perhaps,
take time to consider how much less their interest could be
affected by the freedom of trade, than that of the people whose
example they followed.

To prohibit, by a perpetual law, the importation of foreign corn
and cattle, is in reality to enact, that the population and
industry of the country shall, at no time, exceed what the rude
produce of its own soil can maintain.

There seem, however, to be two cases, in which it will generally
be advantageous to lay some burden upon foreign, for the
encouragement of domestic industry.

The first is, when some particular sort of industry is necessary
for the defence of the country. The defence of Great Britain, for
example, depends very much upon the number of its sailors and
shipping. The act of navigation, therefore, very properly
endeavours to give the sailors and shipping of Great Britain the
monopoly of the trade of their own country, in some cases, by
absolute prohibitions, and in others, by heavy burdens upon the
shipping of foreign countries. The following are the principal
dispositions of this act.

First, All ships, of which the owners, masters, and three-fourths
of the mariners, are not British subjects, are prohibited, upon
pain of forfeiting ship and cargo, from trading to the British
settlements and plantations, or from being employed in the
coasting trade of Great Britain.

Secondly, A great variety of the most bulky articles of
importation can be brought into Great Britain only, either in
such ships as are above described, or in ships of the country
where those goods are produced, and of which the owners, masters,
and three-fourths of the mariners, are of that particular country
; and when imported even in ships of this latter kind, they are
subject to double aliens duty. If imported in ships of any other
country, the penalty is forfeiture of ship and goods. When this
act was made, the Dutch were, what they still are, the great
carriers of Europe; and by this regulation they were entirely
excluded from being the carriers to Great Britain, or from
importing to us the goods of any other European country.

Thirdly, A great variety of the most bulky articles of
importation are prohibited from being imported, even in British
ships, from any country but that in which they are produced,
under pain of forfeiting ship and cargo. This regulation, too,
was probably intended against the Dutch. Holland was then, as
now, the great emporium for all European goods ; and by this
regulation, British ships were hindered from loading in Holland
the goods of any other European country.

Fourthly, Salt fish of all kinds, whale fins, whalebone, oil, and
blubber, not caught by and cured on board British vessels, when
imported into Great Britain, are subject to double aliens duty.
The Dutch, as they are still the principal, were then the only
fishers in Europe that attempted to supply foreign nations with
fish. By this regulation, a very heavy burden was laid upon their
supplying Great Britain.

When the act of navigation was made, though England and Holland
were not actually at war, the most violent animosity subsisted
between the two nations. It had begun during the government of
the long parliament, which first framed this act, and it broke
out soon after in the Dutch wars, during that of the Protector
and of Charles II. It is not impossible, therefore, that some of
the regulations of this famous act may have proceeded from
national animosity. They are as wise, however, as if they had all
been dictated by the most deliberate wisdom. National animosity,
at that particular time, aimed at the very same object which the
most deliberate wisdom would have recommended, the diminution of
the naval power of Holland, the only naval power which could
endanger the security of England.

The act of navigation is not favourable to foreign commerce, or
to the growth of that opulence which can arise from it. The
interest of a nation, in its commercial relations to foreign
nations, is, like that of a merchant with regard to the different
people with whom he deals, to buy as cheap, and to sell as dear
as possible. But it will be most likely to buy cheap, when, by
the most perfect freedom of trade, it encourages all nations to
bring to it the goods which it has occasion to purchase ; and,
for the same reason, it will be most likely to sell dear, when
its markets are thus filled with the greatest number of buyers.
The act of navigation, it is true, lays no burden upon foreign
ships that come to export the produce of British industry. Even
the ancient aliens duty, which used to be paid upon all goods,
exported as well as imported, has, by several subsequent acts,
been taken off from the greater part of the articles of
exportation. But if foreigners, either by prohibitions or high
duties, are hindered from coming to sell, they cannot always
afford to come to buy ; because, coming without a cargo, they
must lose the freight from their own country to Great Britain. By
diminishing the number of sellers, therefore, we necessarily
diminish that of buyers, and are thus likely not only to buy
foreign goods dearer, but to sell our own cheaper, than if there
was a more perfect freedom of trade. As defence, however, is of
much more importance than opulence, the act of navigation is,
perhaps, the wisest of all the commercial regulations of England.

The second case, in which it will generally be advantageous to
lay some burden upon foreign for the encouragement of domestic
industry, is when some tax is imposed at home upon the produce of
the latter. In this case, it seems reasonable that an equal tax
should be imposed upon the like produce of the former. This would
not give the monopoly of the borne market to domestic industry,
nor turn towards a particular employment a greater share of the
stock and labour of the country, than what would naturally go to
it. It would only hinder any part of what would naturally go to
it from being turned away by the tax into a less natural
direction, and would leave the competition between foreign and
domestic industry, after the tax, as nearly as possible upon the
same footing as before it. In Great Britain, when any such tax is
laid upon the produce of domestic industry, it is usual, at the
same time, in order to stop the clamorous complaints of our
merchants and manufacturers, that they will be undersold at home,
to lay a much heavier duty upon the importation of all foreign
goods of the same kind.

This second limitation of the freedom of trade, according to some
people, should, upon most occasions, be extended much farther
than to the precise foreign commodities which could come into
competition with those which had been taxed at home. When the
necessaries of life have been taxed in any country, it becomes
proper, they pretend, to tax not only the like necessaries of
life imported from other countries, but all sorts of foreign
goods which can come into competition with any thing that is the
produce of domestic industry. Subsistence, they say, becomes
necessarily dearer in consequence of such taxes ; and the price
of labour must always rise with the price of the labourer's
subsistence. Every commodity, therefore, which is the produce of
domestic industry, though not immediately taxed itself, becomes
dearer in consequence of such taxes, because the labour which
produces it becomes so. Such taxes, therefore, are really
equivalent, they say, to a tax upon every particular commodity
produced at home. In order to put domestic upon the same footing
with foreign industry, therefore, it becomes necessary, they
think, to lay some duty upon every foreign commodity, equal to
this enhancement of the price of the home commodities with which
it can come into competition.

Whether taxes upon the necessaries of life, such as those in
Great Britain upon soap, salt, leather, candles, etc. necessarily
raise the price of labour, and consequently that of all other
commodities, I shall consider hereafter, when I come to treat of
taxes. Supposing, however, in the mean time, that they have this
effect, and they have it undoubtedly, this general enhancement of
the price of all commodities, in consequence of that labour, is a
case which differs in the two following respects from that of a
particular commodity, of which the price was enhanced by a
particular tax immediately imposed upon it.

First, It might always be known with great exactness, how far the
price of such a commodity could be enhanced by such a tax ; but
how far the general enhancement of the price of labour might
affect that of every different commodity about which labour was
employed, could never be known with any tolerable exactness. It
would be impossible, therefore, to proportion, with any tolerable
exactness, the tax of every foreign, to the enhancement of the
price of every home commodity.

Secondly, Taxes upon the necessaries of life have nearly the same
effect upon the circumstances of the people as a poor soil and a
bad climate. Provisions are thereby rendered dearer, in the same
manner as if it required extraordinary labour and expense to
raise them. As, in the natural scarcity arising from soil and
climate, it would be absurd to direct the people in what manner
they ought to employ their capitals and industry, so is it
likewise in the artificial scarcity arising from such taxes. To
be left to accommodate, as well as they could, their industry to
their situation, and to find out those employments in which,
notwithstanding their unfavourable circumstances, they might have
some advantage either in the home or in the foreign market, is
what, in both cases, would evidently be most for their advantage.
To lay a new-tax upon them, because they are already overburdened
with taxes, and because they already pay too dear for the
necessaries of life, to make them likewise pay too dear for the
greater part of other commodities, is certainly a most absurd way
of making amends.

Such taxes, when they have grown up to a certain height, are a
curse equal to the barrenness of the earth, and the inclemency of
the heavens, and yet it is in the richest and most industrious
countries that they have been most generally imposed. No other
countries could support so great a disorder. As the strongest
bodies only can live and enjoy health under an unwholesome
regimen, so the nations only, that in every sort of industry have
the greatest natural and acquired advantages, can subsist and
prosper under such taxes. Holland is the country in Europe in
which they abound most, and which, from peculiar circumstances,
continues to prosper, not by means of them, as has been most
absurdly supposed, but in spite of them.

As there are two cases in which it will generally be advantageous
to lay some burden upon foreign for the encouragement of domestic
industry, so there are two others in which it may sometimes be a
matter of deliberation, in the one, how far it is proper to
continue the free importation of certain foreign goods; and, in
the other, how far, or in what manner, it may be proper to
restore that free importation, after it has been for some time
interrupted.

The case in which it may sometimes be a matter of deliberation
how far it is proper to continue the free importation of certain
foreign goods, is when some foreign nation restrains, by high
duties or prohibitions, the importation of some of our
manufactures into their country. Revenge, in this case, naturally
dictates retaliation, and that we should impose the like duties
and prohibitions upon the importation of some or all of their
manufactures into ours. Nations, accordingly, seldom fail to
retaliate in this manner. The French have been particularly
forward to favour their own manufactures, by restraining the
importation of such foreign goods as could come into competition
with them. In this consisted a great part of the policy of Mr
Colbert, who, notwithstanding his great abilities, seems in this
case to have been imposed upon by the sophistry of merchants and
manufacturers, who are always demanding a monopoly against their
countrymen. It is at present the opinion of the most intelligent
men in France, that his operations of this kind have not been
beneficial to his country. That minister, by the tariff of 1667,
imposed very high duties upon a great number of foreign
manufactures. Upon his refusing to moderate them in favour of the
Dutch, they, in 1671, prohibited the importation of the wines,
brandies, and manufactures of France. The war of 1672 seems to
have been in part occasioned by this commercial dispute. The
peace of Nimeguen put an end to it in 1678, by moderating some of
those duties in favour of the Dutch, who in consequence took off
their prohibition. It was about the same time that the French and
English began mutually to oppress each other's industry, by the
like duties and prohibitions, of which the French, however, seem
to have set the first example, The spirit of hostility which has
subsisted between the two nations ever since, has hitherto
hindered them from being moderated on either side. In 1697, the
Ehglish prohibited the importation of bone lace, the manufacture
of Flanders. The government of that country, at that time under
the dominion of Spain, prohibited, in return, the importation of
English woollens. In 1700, the prohibition of importing bone lace
into England was taken oft; upon condition that the importation
of English woollens into Flanders should be put on the same
footing as before.

There may be good policy in retaliations of this kind, when there
is a probability that they will procure the repeal of the high
duties or prohibitions complained of. The recovery of a great
foreign market will generally more than compensate the transitory
inconveniency of paying dearer during a short time for some sorts
of goods. To judge whether such retaliations are likely to
produce such an effect, does not, perhaps, belong so much to the
science of a legislator, whose deliberations ought to be governed
by general principles, which are always the same, as to the skill
of that insidious and crafty animal vulgarly called a statesman
or politician, whose councils are directed by the momentary
fluctuations of affairs. When there is no probability that any
such repeal can be procured, it seems a bad method of
compensating the injury done to certain classes of our people, to
do another injury ourselves, not only to those classes, but to
almost all the other classes of them. When our neighbours
prohibit some manufacture of ours, we generally prohibit, not
only the same, for that alone would seldom affect them
considerably, but some other manufacture of theirs. This may, no
doubt, give encouragement to some particular class of workmen
among ourselves, and, by excluding some of their rivals, may
enable them to raise their price in the home market. Those
workmen however, who suffered by our neighbours prohibition, will
not be benefited by ours. On the contrary, they, and almost all
the other classes of our citizens, will thereby be obliged to pay
dearer than before for certain goods. Every such law, therefore,
imposes a real tax upon the whole country, not in favour of that
particular class of workmen who were injured by our neighbours
prohibitions, but of some other class.

The case in which it may sometimes be a matter of deliberation,
how far, or in what manner, it is proper to restore the free
importation of foreign goods, after it has been for some time
interrupted, is when particular manufactures, by means of high
duties or prohibitions upon all foreign goods which can come into
competition with them, have been so far extended as to employ a
great multitude of hands. Humanity may in this case require that
the freedom of trade should be restored only by slow gradations,
and with a good deal of reserve and circumspection. Were those
high duties and prohibitions taken away all at once, cheaper
foreign goods of the same kind might be poured so fast into the
home market, as to deprive all at once many thousands of our
people of their ordinary employment and means of subsistence. The
disorder which this would occasion might no doubt be very
considerable. It would in all probability, however, be much less
than is commonly imagined, for the two following reasons.

First, All those manufactures of which any part is commonly
exported to other European countries without a bounty, could be
very little affected by the freest importation of foreign goods.
Such manufactures must be sold as cheap abroad as any other
foreign goods of the same quality and kind, and consequently must
be sold cheaper at home. They would still, therefore, keep
possession of the home market; and though a capricious man of
fashion might sometimes prefer foreign wares, merely because they
were foreign, to cheaper and better goods of the same kind that
were made at home, this folly could, from the nature of things,
extend to so few, that it could make no sensible impression upon
the general employment of the people. But a great part of all the
different branches of our woollen manufacture, of our tanned
leather, and of our hardware, are annually exported to other
European countries without any bounty, and these are the
manufactures which employ the greatest number of hands. The silk,
perhaps, is the manufacture which would suffer the most by this
freedom of trade, and after it the linen, though the latter much
less than the former.

Secondly, Though a great number of people should, by thus
restoring the freedom of trade, be thrown all at once out of
their ordinary employment and common method of subsistence, it
would by no means follow that they would thereby be deprived
either of employment or subsistence. By the reduction of the army
and navy at the end of the late war, more than 100,000 soldiers
and seamen, a number equal to what is employed in the greatest
manufactures, were all at once thrown out of their ordinary
employment : but though they no doubt suffered some
inconveniency, they were not thereby deprived of all employment
and subsistence. The greater part of the seamen, it is probable,
gradually betook themselves to the merchant service as they could
find occasion, and in the mean time both they and the soldiers
were absorbed in the great mass of the people, and employed in a
great variety of occupations. Not only no great convulsion, but
no sensible disorder, arose from so great a change in the
situation of more than 100,000 men, all accustomed to the use of
arms, and many of them to rapine and plunder. The number of
vagrants was scarce anywhere sensibly increased by it ; even the
wages of labour were not reduced by it in any occupation, so far
as I have been able to learn, except in that of seamen in the
merchant service. But if we compare together the habits of a
soldier and of any sort of manufacturer, we shall find that those
of the latter do not tend so much to disqualify him from being
employed in a new trade, as those of the former from being
employed in any. The manufacturer has always been accustomed to
look for his subsistence from his labour only ; the soldier to
expect it from his pay. Application and industry have been
familiar to the one; idleness and dissipation to the other. But
it is surely much easier to change the direction of industry from
one sort of labour to another, than to turn idleness and
dissipation to any. To the greater part of manufactures, besides,
it has already been observed, there are other collateral
manufactures of so similar a nature, that a workman can easily
transfer his industry from one of them to another. The greater
part of such workmen, too, are occasionally employed in country
labour. The stock which employed them in a particular manufacture
before, will still remain in the country, to employ an equal
number of people in some other way. The capital of the country
remaining the same, the demand for labour will likewise be the
same, or very nearly the same, though it may be exerted in
different places, and for different occupations. Soldiers and
seamen, indeed, when discharged from the king's service, are at
liberty to exercise any trade within any town or place of Great
Britain or Ireland. Let the same natural liberty of exercising
what species of industry they please, be restored to all his
Majesty's subjects, in the same manner as to soldiers and seamen
; that is, break down the exclusive privileges of corporations,
and repeal the statute of apprenticeship, both which are really
encroachments upon natural Liberty, and add to those the repeal
of the law of settlements, so that a poor workman, when thrown
out of employment, either in one trade or in one place, may seek
for it in another trade or in another place, without the fear
either of a prosecution or of a removal; and neither the public
nor the individuals will suffer much more from the occasional
disbanding some particular classes of manufacturers, than from
that of the soldiers. Our manufacturers have no doubt great merit
with their country, but they cannot have more than those who
defend it with their blood, nor deserve to be treated with more
delicacy.

To expect, indeed, that the freedom of trade should ever be
entirely restored in Great Britain, is as absurd as to expect
that an Oceana or Utopia should ever be established in it. Not
only the prejudices of the public, but, what is much more
unconquerable, the private interests of many individuals,
irresistibly oppose it. Were the officers of the army to oppose,
with the same zeal and unanimity, any reduction in the number of
forces, with which master manufacturers set themselves against
every law that is likely to increase the number of their rivals
in the home market ; were the former to animate their soldiers.
In the same manner as the latter inflame their workmen, to attack
with violence and outrage the proposers of any such regulation;
to attempt to reduce the army would be as dangerous as it has now
become to attempt to diminish, in any respect, the monopoly which
our manufacturers have obtained against us. This monopoly has so
much increased the number of some particular tribes of them,
that, like an overgrown standing army, they have become
formidable to the government, and, upon many occasions,
intimidate the legislature. The member of parliament who supports
every proposal for strengthening this monopoly, is sure to
acquire not only the reputation of understanding trade, but great
popularity and influence with an order of men whose numbers and
wealth render them of great importance. If he opposes them, on
the contrary, and still more, if he has authority enough to be
able to thwart them, neither the most acknowledged probity, nor
the highest rank, nor the greatest public services, can protect
him from the most infamous abuse and detraction, from personal
insults, nor sometimes from real danger, arising from the
insolent outrage of furious and disappointed monopolists.

The undertaker of a great manufacture, who, by the home markets
being suddenly laid open to the competition of foreigners, should
be obliged to abandon his trade, would no doubt suffer very
considerably. That part of his capital which had usually been
employed in purchasing materials, and in paying his workmen,
might, without much difficulty, perhaps, find another employment
; but that part of it which was fixed in workhouses, and in the
instruments of trade, could scarce be disposed of without
considerable loss. The equitable regard, therefore, to his
interest, requires that changes of this kind should never be
introduced suddenly, but slowly, gradually, and after a very long
warning. The legislature, were it possible that its deliberations
could be always directed, not by the clamorous importunity of
partial interests, but by an extensive view of the general good,
ought, upon this very account, perhaps, to be particularly
careful, neither to establish any new monopolies of this kind,
nor to extend further those which are already established. Every
such regulation introduces some degree of real disorder into the
constitution of the state, which it will be difficult afterwards
to cure without occasioning another disorder.

How far it may be proper to impose taxes upon the importation of
foreign goods, in order not to prevent their importation, but to
raise a revenue for government, I shall consider hereafter when I
come to treat of taxes. Taxes imposed with a view to prevent, or
even to diminish importation, are evidently as destructive of the
revenue of the customs as of the freedom of trade.


CHAPTER   III.

OF THE EXTRAORDINARY RESTRAINTS UPON THE IMPORTATION OF GOODS OF
ALMOST ALL KINDS, FROM THOSE COUNTRIES WITH WHICH THE BALANCE IS
SUPPOSED TO BE DISADVANTAGEOUS.

Part I - Of the Unreasonableness of those Restraints, even upon
the Principles of the Commercial System.

To lay extraordinary restraints upon the importation of goods of
almost all kinds, from those particular countries with which the
balance of trade is supposed to be disadvantageous, is the second
expedient by which the commercial system proposes to increase the
quantity of gold and silver. Thus, in Great Britain, Silesia
lawns may be imported for home consumption, upon paying certain
duties; but French cambrics and lawns are prohibited to be
imported, except into the port of London, there to be warehoused
for exportation. Higher duties are imposed upon the wines of
France than upon those of Portugal, or indeed of any other
country. By what is called the impost 1692, a duty of five
and-twenty per cent. of the rate or value, was laid upon all
French goods; while the goods of other nations were, the greater
part of them, subjected to much lighter duties, seldom exceeding
five per cent. The wine, brandy, salt, and vinegar of France,
were indeed excepted; these commodities being subjected to other
heavy duties, either by other laws, or by particular clauses of
the same law. In 1696, a second duty of twenty-five per cent. the
first not having been thought a sufficient discouragement, was
imposed upon all French goods, except brandy ; together with a
new duty of five-and-twenty pounds upon the ton of French wine,
and another of fifteen pounds upon the ton of French vinegar.
French goods have never been omitted in any of those general
subsidies or duties of five per cent. which have been imposed
upon all, or the greater part, of the goods enumerated in the
book of rates. If we count the one-third and two-third subsidies
as making a complete subsidy between them, there have been five
of these general subsidies; so that, before the commencement of
the present war, seventy-five per cent. may be considered as the
lowest duty to which the greater part of the goods of the growth,
produce, or manufacture of France, were liable. But upon the
greater part of goods, those duties are equivalent to a
prohibition. The French, in their turn, have, I believe, treated
our goods and manufactures just as hardly; though I am not so
well acquainted with the particular hardships which they have
imposed upon them. Those mutual restraints have put an end to
almost all fair commerce between the two nations; and smugglers
are now the principal importers, either of British goods into
France, or of French goods into Great Britain. The principles
which I have been examining, in the foregoing chapter, took their
origin from private interest and the spirit of monopoly ; those
which I am going te examine in this, from national prejudice and
animosity. They are, accordingly, as might well be expected,
still more unreasonable. They are so, even upon the principles of
the commercial system.

First, Though it were certain that in the case of a free trade
between France and England, for example, the balance would be in
favour of France, it would by no means follow that such a trade
would be disadvantageous to England, or that the general balance
of its whole trade would thereby be turned more against it. If
the wines of France are better and cheaper than those of
Portugal, or its linens than those of Germany, it would be more
advantageous for Great Britain to purchase both the wine and the
foreign linen which it had occasion for of France, than of
Portugal and Germany. Though the value of the annual importations
from France would thereby be greatly augmented, the value of the
whole annual importations would be diminished, in proportion as
the French goods of the same quality were cheaper than those of
the other two countries. This would be the case, even upon the
supposition that the whole French goods imported were to be
consumed in Great Britain.

But, Secondly, A great part of them might be re-exported to other
countries, where, being sold with profit, they might bring back a
return. equal in value, perhaps, to the prime cost of the whole
French goods imported. What has frequently been said of the East
India trade, might possibly be true of the French; that though
the greater part of East India goods were bought with gold and
silver, the re-exportation of a part of them to other countries
brought back more gold and silver to that which carried on the
trade, than the prime cost of the whole amounted to. One of the
most important branches of the Dutch trade at present, consists
in the carriage of French goods to other European countries. Some
part even of the French wine drank in Great Britain, is
clandestinely imported from Holland and Zealand. If there was
either a free trade between France and England, or if French
goods could be imported upon paying only the same duties as those
of other European nations, to be drawn back upon exportation,
England might have some share of a trade which is found so
advantageous to Holland.

Thirdly, and lastly, There is no certain criterion by which we
can determine on which side what is called the balance between
any two countries lies, or which of them exports to the greatest
value. National prejudice and animosity, prompted always by the
private interest of particular traders, are the principles which
generally direct our judgment upon all questions concerning it.
There are two criterions, however, which have frequently been
appealed to upon such occasions, the custom-house books and the
course of exchange. The custom-house books, I think, it is now
generally acknowledged, are a very uncertain criterion, on
account of the inaccuracy of the valuation at which the greater
part of goods are rated in them. The course of exchange is,
perhaps, almost equally so.

When the exchange between two places, such as London and Paris,
is at par, it is said to be a sign that the debts due from London
to Paris are compensated by those due from Paris to London. On
the contrary, when a premium is paid at London for a bill upon
Paris, it is said to be a sign that the debts due from London to
Paris are not compensated by those due from Paris to London, but
that a balance in money must be sent out from the latter place;
for the risk, trouble, and expense, of exporting which, the
premium is both demanded and given. But the ordinary state of
debt and credit between those two cities must necessarily be
regulated, it is said, by the ordinary course of their dealings
with one another. When neither of them imports from from other to
a greater amount than it exports to that other, the debts and
credits of each may compensate one another. But when one of them
imports from the other to a greater value than it exports to that
other, the former necessarily becomes indebted to the latter in a
greater sum than the latter becomes indebted to it: the debts and
credits of each do not compensate one another, and money must be
sent out from that place of which the debts overbalance the
credits. The ordinary course of exchange, therefore, being an
indication of the ordinary state of debt and credit between two
places, must likewise be an indication of the ordinary course of
their exports and imports, as these necessarily regulate that
state.

But though the ordinary course of exchange shall be allowed to be
a sufficient indication of the ordinary state of debt and credit
between any two places, it would not from thence follow, that the
balance of trade was in favour of that place which had the
ordinary state of debt and credit in its favour. The ordinary
state of debt and credit between any two places is not always
entirely regulated by the ordinary course of their dealings with
one another, but is often influenced by that of the dealings of
either with many other places. If it is usual, for example, for
the merchants of England to pay for the goods which they buy of
Hamburg, Dantzic, Riga, etc. by bills upon Holland, the ordinary
state of debt and credit between England and Holland will not be
regulated entirely by the ordinary course of the dealings of
those two countries with one another, but will be influenced by
that of the dealings in England with those other places. England
may be obliged to send out every year money to Holland, though
its annual exports to that country may exceed very much the
annual value of its imports from thence, and though what is
called the balance of trade may be very much in favour of
England.

In the way, besides, in which the par of exchange has hitherto
been computed, the ordinary course of exchange can afford no
sufficient indication that the ordinary state of debt and credit
is in favour of that country which seems to have, or which is
supposed to have, the ordinary course of exchange in its favour ;
or, in other words, the real exchange may be, and in fact often
is, so very different from the computed one, that, from the
course of the latter, no certain conclusion can, upon many
occasions, be drawn concerning that of the former.

When for a sum or money paid in England, containing, according to
the standard of the English mint, a certain number of ounces of
pure silver, you receive a bill for a sum of money to be paid in
France, containing, according to the standard of the French mint,
an equal number of ounces of pure silver, exchange is said to be
at par between England and France. When you pay more, you are
supposed to give a premium, and exchange is said to be against
England, and in favour of France. When you pay less, you are
supposed to get a premium, and exchange is said to be against
France, and in favour of England.

But, first, We cannot always judge of the value of the current
money of different countries by the standard of their respective
mints. In some it is more, in others it is less worn, clipt, and
otherwise degenerated from that standard. But the value of the
current coin of every country, compared with that of any other
country, is in proportion, not to the quantity of pure silver
which it ought to contain, but to that which it actually does
contain. Before the reformation of the silver coin in King
William's time, exchange between England and Holland, computed in
the usual manner, according to the standard of their respective
mints, was five-and twenty per cent. against England. But the
value of the current coin of England, as we learn from Mr
Lowndes, was at that time rather more than five-and-twenty per
cent. below its standard value. The real exchange, therefore, may
even at that time have been in favour of England, notwithstanding
the computed exchange was so much against it ; a smaller number
or ounces of pure silver, actually paid in England, may have
purchased a bill for a greater number of ounces of pure silver to
be paid in Holland, and the man who was supposed to give, may in
reality have got the premium. The French coin was, before the
late reformation of the English gold coin, much less wore than
the English, and was perhaps two or three per cent. nearer its
standard. If the computed exchange with France, therefore, was
not more than two or three per cent. against England, the real
exchange might have been in its favour. Since the reformation of
the gold coin, the exchange has been constantly in favour of
England, and against France.

Secondly, In some countries the expense of coinage is defrayed by
the government; in others, it is defrayed by the private people,
who carry their bullion to the mint, and the government even
derives some revenue from the coinage. In England it is defrayed
by the government; and if you carry a pound weight of standard
silver to the mint, you get back sixty-two shillings, containing
a pound weight of the like standard silver. In France a duty of
eight per cent. is deducted for the coinage, which not only
defrays the expense of it, but affords a small revenue to the
government. In England, as the coinage costs nothing, the current
coin can never be much more valuable than the quantity of bullion
which it actually contains. In France, the workmanship, as you
pay for it, adds to the value, in the same manner as to that of
wrought plate. A sum of French money, therefore, containing an
equal weight of pure silver, is more valuable than a sum of
English money containing an equal weight of pure silver, and must
require more bullion, or other commodities, to purchase it.
Though the current coin of the two countries, therefore, were
equally near the standards of their respective mints, a sum of
English money could not well purchase a sum of French money
containing an equal number of ounces of pure silver, nor,
consequently, a bill upon France for such a sum. If, for such a
bill, no more additional money was paid than what was sufficient
to compensate the expense of the French coinage, the real
exchange might be at par between the two countries; their debts
and credits might mutually compensate one another, while the
computed exchange was considerably in favour of France. If less
than this was paid, the real exchange might be in favour of
England, while the computed was in favour of France.

Thirdly, and lastly, In some places, as at Amsterdam, Hamburg,
Venice, etc. foreign bills of exchange are paid in what they call
bank money ; while in others, as at London, Lisbon, Antwerp,
Leghorn, etc. they are paid in the common currency of the
country. What is called bank money, is always of more value than
the same nominal sum of common currency. A thousand guilders in
the bank of Amsterdam, for example, are of more vallue than a
thousand guilders of Amsterdam currency. The difference between
them is called the agio of the bank, which at Amsterdam is
generally about five per cent. Supposing the current money of the
two countries equally near to the standard of their respective
mints, and that the one pays foreign bills in this common
currency, while the other pays them in bank money, it is evident
that the computed exchange may be in favour of that which pays in
bank money, though the real exchange should be in favour of that
which pays in current money; for the same reason that the
computed exchange may be in favour of that which pays in better
money, or in money nearer to its own standard, though the real
exchange should be in favour of that which pays in worse. The
computed exchange, before the late reformation of the gold coin,
was generally against London with Amsterdam, Hamburg, Venice,
and, I believe, with all other places which pay in what is called
bank money. It will by no means follow, however, that the real
exchange was against it. Since the reformation of the gold coin,
it has been in favour of London, even with those places. The
computed exchange has generally been in favour of London with
Lisbon, Antwerp, Leghorn, and, if you except France, I believe
with most other parts of Europe that pay in common currency ; and
it is not improbable that the real exchange was so too.

Digression concerning Banks of Deposit, particularly concerning
that of Amsterdam.

The currency of a great state, such as France or England,
generally consists almost entirely of its own coin. Should this
currency, therefore, be at any time worn, clipt, or otherwise
degraded below its standard value, the state, by a reformation of
its coin, can effectually re-establish its currency. But the
currency of a small state, such as Genoa or Hamburg, can seldom
consist altogether in its own coin, but must be made up, in a
great measure, of the coins of all the neighbouring states with
which its inhabitants have a continual intercourse. Such a state,
therefore, by reforming its coin, will not always be able to
reform its currency. If foreign bills of exchange are paid in
this currency, the uncertain value of any sum, of what is in its
own nature so uncertain, must render the exchange always very
much against such a state, its currency being in all foreign
states necessarily valued even below what it is worth.

In order to remedy the inconvenience to which this
disadvantageous exchange must have subjected their merchants,
such small states, when they began to attend to the interest of
trade, have frequently enacted that foreign bills of exchange of
a certain value should be paid, not in common currency, but by an
order upon, or by a transfer in the books of a certain bank,
established upon the credit, and under the protection of the
state, this bank being always obliged to pay, in good and true
money, exactly according to the standard of the state. The banks
of Venice, Genoa, Amsterdam, Hamburg, and Nuremberg, seem to have
been all originally established with this view, though some of
them may have afterwards been made subservient to other purposes.
The money of such banks, being better than the common currency of
the country, necessarily bore an agio, which was greater or
smaller, according as the currency was supposed to be more or
less degraded below the standard of the state. The agio of the
bank of Hamburg, for example, which is said to be commonly about
fourteen per cent. is the supposed difference between the good
standard money of the state, and the clipt, worn, and diminished
currency, poured into it from all the neighbouring states.

Before 1609, the great quantity of clipt and worn foreign coin
which the extensive trade of Amsterdam brought from all parts of
Europe, reduced the value of its currency about nine per cent.
below that of good money fresh from the mint. Such money no
sooner appeared, than it was melted down or carried away, as it
always is in such circumstances. The merchants, with plenty of
currency, could not always find a sufficient quantity of good
money to pay their bills of exchange ; and the value of those
bills, in spite of several regulations which were made to prevent
it, became in a great measure uncertain.

In order to remedy these inconveniencies, a bank was established
in 1609, under the guarantee of the city. This bank received both
foreign coin, and the light and worn coin of the country, at its
real intrinsic value in the good standard money of the country,
deducting only so much as was neccssary for defraying the expense
of coinage and the other necessary expense of management. For the
value which remained after this small deduction was made, it gave
a credit in its books. This credit was called bank money, which,
as it represented money exactly according to the standard of the
mint, was always of the same real value, and intrinsically worth
more than current money. It was at the same time enacted, that
all bills drawn upon or negotiated at Amsterdam, of the value of
600 guilders and upwards, should be paid in bank money, which at
once took away all uncertainty in the value of those bills. Every
merchant, in consequence of this regulation, was obliged to keep
an account with the bank, in order to pay his foreign bills of
exchange, which necessarily occasioned a certain demand for bank
money.

 Bank money, over and above both its in trinsic superiority to
currency, and the additional value which this demand necessarily
gives it, has likewise some other advantages, It is secure from
fire, robbery, and other accidents; the city of Amsterdam is
bound for it; it can be paid away by a simple transfer, without
the trouble of counting, or the risk of transporting it from one
place to another. In consequence of those different advantages,
it seems from the beginning to have borne an agio; and it is
generally believed that all the money originally deposited in the
bank, was allowed to remain there, nobody caring to demand
payment of a debt which he could sell for a premium in the
market. By demanding payment of the bank, the owner of a bank
credit would lose this premium. As a shilling fresh from the mint
will buy no more goods in the market than one of our common worn
shillings, so the good and true money which might be brought from
the coffers of the bank into those of a private person, being
mixed and confounded with the common currency of the country,
would be of no more value than that currency, from which it could
no longer be readily distinguished. While it remained in the
coffers of the bank, its superiority was known and ascertained.
When it had come into those of a private person, its superiority
could not well be ascertained without more trouble than perhaps
the difference was worth. By being brought from the coffers of
the bank, besides, it lost all the other advantages of bank
money; its security, its easy and safe transferability, its use
in paying foreign bills of exchange. Over and above all this, it
could not be brought from those coffers, as will appear by and
by, without previously paying for the keeping.

Those deposits of coin, or those deposits which the bank was
bound to restore in coin, constituted the original capital of the
bank, or the whole value of what was represented by what is
called bank money. At present they are supposed to constitute but
a very small part of it. In order to facilitate the trade in
bullion, the bank has been for these many years in the practice
of giving credit in its books, upon deposits of gold and silver
bullion. This credit is generally about five per cent. below the
mint price of such bullion. The bank grants at the same time what
is called a recipice or receipt, entitling the person who makes
the deposit, or the bearer, to take out the bullion again at any
time within six months, upon transferring to the bank a quantity
of bank money equal to that for which credit had been given in
its books when the deposit was made, and upon paying one-fourth
per cent. for the keeping, if the deposit was in silver ; and
one-half per cent. if it was in gold; but at the same time
declaring, that in default of such payment, and upon the
expiration of this term, the deposit should belong to the bank,
at the price at which it had been received, or for which credit
had been given in the transfer books. What is thus paid for the
keeping of the deposit may be considered as a sort of warehouse
rent; and why this warehouse rent should be so much dearer for
gold than for silver, several different reasons have been
assigned. The fineness of gold, it has been said, is more
difficult to be ascertained than that of silver. Frauds are more
easily practised, and occasion a greater loss in the most
precious metal. Silver, besides, being the standard metal, the
state, it has been said, wishes to encourage more the making of
deposits of silver than those of gold.

Deposits of bullion are most commonly made when the price is
somewhat lower than ordinary, and they are taken out again when
it happens to rise. In Holland the market price of bullion is
generally above the mint price, for the same reason that it was
so in England before the late reformation of the gold coin. The
difference is said to be commonly from about six to sixteen
stivers upon the mark, or eight ounces of silver, of eleven parts
of fine and one part alloy. The bank price, or the credit which
the bank gives for the deposits of such silver (when made in
foreign coin, of which the fineness is well known and
ascertained, such as Mexico dollars), is twenty-two guilders the
mark : the mint price is about twenty-three guilders, and the
market price is from twenty-three guilders six, to twenty-three
guilders sixteen stivers, or from two to three per cent. above
the mint price.

 The following are the prices at which the bank of Amsterdam at
present {September 1775} receives bullion and coin of different
kinds:
                              SILVER
     Mexico dollars  .................  22  Guilders / mark
     French crowns  ..................  22
     English silver coin .............  22
     Mexico dollars, new coin ........  21  10
     Ducatoons .......................   3   0
     Rix-dollars .....................   2   8

Bar silver, containing 11-12ths fine silver, 21 Guilders / mark,
and in this proportion down to 1-4th fine, on which 5 guilders
are given. Fine bars, ................. 28  Guilders / mark.

                              GOLD
     Portugal coin .................  310  Guilders / mark
     Guineas .......................  310
     Louis d'ors, new ..............  310
     Ditto        old ..............  300
     New ducats ....................    4  19  8  per ducat

Bar or ingot gold is received in proportion to its fineness,
compared with the above foreign gold coin. Upon fine bars the
bank gives 340 per mark. In general, however, something more is
given upon coin of a known fineness, than upon gold and silver
bars, of which the fineness cannot be ascertained but by a
process of melting and assaying.

The proportions between the bank price, the mint price, and the
market price of gold bullion, are nearly the same. A person can
generally sell his receipt for the difference between the mint
price of bullion and the market price. A receipt for bullion is
almost always worth something, and it very seldom happens,
therefore, that anybody suffers his receipts to expire, or allows
his bullion to fall to the bank at the price at which it had been
received, either by not taking it out before the end of the six
months, or by neglecting to pay one fourth or one half per cent.
in order to obtain a new receipt for another six months. This,
however, though it happens seldom, is said to happen sometimes,
and more frequently with regard to gold than with regard to
silver, on account of the higher warehouse rent which is paid for
the keeping of the more precious metal.

The person who, by making a deposit of bullion, obtains both a
bank credit and a receipt, pays his bills of exchange as they
become due, with his bank credit; and either sells or keeps his
receipt, according as he judges that the price of bullion is
likely to rise or to fall. The receipt and the bank credit seldom
keep long together, and there is no occasion that they should.
The person who has a receipt, and who wants to take out bullion,
finds always plenty of bank credits, or bank money, to buy at the
ordinary price, and the person who has bank money, and wants to
take out bullion, finds receipts always in equal abundance.

The owners of bank credits, and the holders of receipts,
constitute two different sorts of creditors against the bank. The
holder of a receipt cannot draw out the bullion for which it is
granted, without re-assigning to the bank a sum of bank money
equal to the price at which the bullion had been received. If he
has no bank money of his own, he must purchase it of those who
have it. The owner of bank money cannot draw out bullion, without
producing to the bank receipts for the quantity which he wants.
If he has none of his own, he must buy them of those who have
them. The holder of a receipt, when he purchases bank money,
purchases the power of taking out a quantity of bullion, of which
the mint price is five per cent. above the bank price. The agio
of five per cent. therefore, which he commonly pays for it, is
paid, not for an imaginary, but for a real value. The owner of
bank money, when he purchases a receipt, purchases the power of
taking out a quantity of bullion, of which the market price is
commonly from two to three per cent. above the mint price. The
price which he pays for it, therefore, is paid likewise for a
real value. The price of the receipt, and the price of the bank
money, compound or make up between them the full value or price
of the bullion.

Upon deposits of the coin current in the country, the bank grant
receipts likewise, as well as bank credits; but those receipts
are frequently of no value and will bring no price in the market.
Upon ducatoons, for example, which in the currency pass for three
guilders three stivers each, the bank gives a credit of three
guilders only, or five per cent. below their current value. It
grants a receipt likewise, entitling the bearer to take out the
number of ducatoons deposited at any time within six months, upon
paying one fourth per cent. for the keeping. This receipt will
frequently bring no price in the market. Three guilders, bank
money, generally sell in the market for three guilders three
stivers, the full value of the ducatoons, if they were taken out
of the bank ; and before they can be taken out, one-fourth per
cent. must be paid for the keeping, which would be mere loss to
the holder of the receipt. If the agio of the bank, however,
should at any time fall to three per cent. such receipts might
bring some price in the market, and might sell for one and
three-fourths per cent. But the agio of the bank being now
generally about five per cent. such receipts are frequently
allowed to expire, or, as they express it, to fall to the bank.
The receipts which are given for deposits of gold ducats fall to
it yet more frequently, because a higher warehouse rent, or one
half per cent. must be paid for the keeping of them, before they
can be taken out again. The five per cent. which the bank gains,
when deposits either of coin or bullion are allowed to fall to
it, maybe considered as the warehouse rent for the perpetual
keeping of such deposits.

The sum of bank money, for which the receipts are expired, must
be very considerable. It must comprehend the whole original
capital of the bank, which, it is generally supposed, has been
allowed to remain there from the time it was first deposited,
nobody caring either to renew his receipt, or to take out his
deposit, as, for the reasons already assigned, neither the one
nor the other could be done without loss. But whatever may be the
amount of this sum, the proportion which it bears to the whole
mass of bank money is supposed to be very small. The bank of
Amsterdam has, for these many years past, been the great
warehouse of Europe for bullion, for which the receipts are very
seldom allowed to expire, or, as they express it, to fall to the
bank. The far greater part of the bank money, or of the credits
upon the books of the bank, is supposed to have been created, for
these many years past, by such deposits, which the dealers in
bullion are continually both making and withdrawing.

No demand can be made upon the bank, but by means of a recipice
or receipt. The smaller mass of bank money, for which the
receipts are expired, is mixed and confounded with the much
greater mass for which they are still in force; so that, though
there may be a considerable sum of bank money, for which there
are no receipts, there is no specific sum or portion of it which
may not at any time be demanded by one. The bank cannot be debtor
to two persons for the same thing; and the owner of bank money
who has no receipt, cannot demand payment of the bank till he
buys one. In ordinary and quiet times, he can find no difficulty
in getting one to buy at the market price, which generally
corresponds with the price at which he can sell the coin or
bullion it entitles him to take out of the bank.

It might be otherwise during a public calamity ; an invasion, for
example, such as that of the French in 1672. The owners of bank
money being then all eager to draw it out of the bank, in order
to have it in their own keeping, the demand for receipts might
raise their price to an exorbitant height. The holders of them
might form extravagant expectations, and, instead of two or three
per cent. demand half the bank money for which credit had been
given upon the deposits that the receipts had respectively been
granted for. The enemy, informed of the constitution of the bank,
might even buy them up, in order to prevent the carrying away of
the treasure. In such emergencies, the bank, it is supposed,
would break through its ordinary rule of making payment only to
the holders of receipts. The holders of receipts, who had no bank
money, must have received within two or three per cent. of the
value of the deposit for which their respective receipts had been
granted. The bank, therefore, it is said, would in this case make
no scruple of paying, either with money or bullion, the full
value of what the owners of bank money, who could get no
receipts, were credited for in its books; paying, at the same
time, two or three per cent. to such holders of receipts as had
no bank money, that being the whole value which, in this state of
things, could justly be supposed due to them.

Even in ordinary and quiet times, it is the interest of the
holders of receipts to depress the agio, in order either to buy
bank money (and consequently the bullion which their receipts
would then enable them to take out of the bank ) so much cheaper,
or to sell their receipts to those who have bank money, and who
want to take out bullion, so much dearer ; the price of a receipt
being generally equal to the difference between the market price
of bank money and that of the coin or bullion for which the
receipt had been granted. It is the interest of the owners of
bank money, on the contrary, to raise the agio, in order either
to sell their bank money so much dearer, or to buy a receipt so
much cheaper. To prevent the stock-jobbing tricks which those
opposite interests might sometimes occasion, the bank has of late
years come to the resolution, to sell at all times bank money for
currency at five per cent. agio, and to buy it in again at four
per cent. agio. In consequence of this resolution, the agio can
never either rise above five, or sink below four per cent. ; and
the proportion between the market price of bank and that of
current money is kept at all times very near the proportion
between their intrinsic values. Before this resolution was taken,
the market price of bank money used sometimes to rise so high as
nine per cent. agio, and sometimes to sink so low as par,
according as opposite interests happened to influence the market.

The bank of Amsterdam professes to lend out no part of what is
deposited with it, but for every guilder for which it gives
credit in its books, to keep in its repositories the value of a
guilder either in money or bullion. That it keeps in its
repositories all the money or bullion for which there are
receipts in force for which it is at all times liable to be
called upon, and which in reality is continually going from it,
and returning to it again, cannot well be doubted. But whether it
does so likewise with regard to that part of its capital for
which the receipts are long ago expired, for which, in ordinary
and quiet times, it cannot be called upon, and which, in reality,
is very likely to remain with it for ever, or as long as the
states of the United Provinces subsist, may perhaps appear more
uncertain. At Amsterdam, however, no point of faith is better
established than that, for every guilder circulated as bank
money, there is a correspondent guilder in gold or silver to be
found in the treasures of the bank. The city is guarantee that it
should be so. The bank is under the direction of the four
reigning burgomasters who are changed every year. Each new set of
burgomasters visits the treasure, compares it with the books,
receives it upon oath, and delivers it over, with the same awful
solemnity to the set which succeeds ; and in that sober and
religious country, oaths are not yet disregarded. A rotation of
this kind seems alone a sufficient security against any practices
which cannot be avowed. Amidst all the revolutions which faction
has ever occasioned in the government of Amsterdam, the
prevailing party has at no time accused their predecessors of
infidelity in the administration of the bank. No accusation could
have affected more deeply the reputation and fortune of the
disgraced party ; and if such an accusation could have been
supported, we may be assured that it would have been brought. In
1672, when the French king was at Utrecht, the bank of Amsterdam
paid so readily, as left no doubt of the fidelity with which it
had observed its engagements. Some of the pieces which were then
brought from its repositories, appeared to have been scorched
with the fire which happened in the town-house soon after the
bank was established. Those pieces, therefore, must have lain
there from that time.

What may be the amount of the treasure in the bank, is a question
which has long employed the speculations of the curious. Nothing
but conjecture can be offered concerning it. It is generally
reckoned, that there are about 2000 people who keep accounts with
the bank; and allowing them to have, one with another, the value
of 1500 sterling lying upon their respective accounts (a very
large allowance), the whole quantity of bank money, and
consequently of treasure in the bank, will amount to about
3,000,000 sterling, or, at eleven guilders the pound sterling,
33,000,000 of guilders ; a great sum, and sufficient to carry on
a very extensive circulation, but vastly below the extravagant
ideas which some people have formed of this treasure.

The city of Amsterdam derives a considerable revenue from the
bank. Besides what may be called the warehouse rent above
mentioned, each person, upon first opening an account with the
bank, pays a fee of ten guilders ; and for every new account,
three guilder's three stivers; for every transfer, two stivers;
and if the transfer is for less than 300 guilders, six stivers,
in order to discourage the multiplicity of small transactions.
The person who neglects to balance his account twice in the year,
forfeits twenty-five guilders. The person who orders a transfer
for more than is upon his account, is obliged to pay three per
cent. for the sum overdrawn, and his order is set aside into the
bargain. The bank is supposed, too, to make a considerable profit
by the sale of the foreign coin or bullion which sometimes falls
to it by the expiring of receipts, and which is always kept till
it can be sold with advantage. It makes a profit, likewise, by
selling bank money at five per cent. agio, and buying it in at
four. These different emoluments amount to a good deal more than
what is necessary for paying the salaries of officers, and
defraying the expense of management. What is paid for the keeping
of bullion upon receipts, is alone supposed to amount to a neat
annual revenue of between 150,000 and 200,000 guilders. Public
utility, however, and not revenue, was the original object of
this institution. Its object was to relieve the merchants from
the inconvenience of a disadvantageous exchange. The revenue
which has arisen from it was unforeseen, and may be considered as
accidental. But it is now time to return from this long
digression, into which I have been insensibly led, in
endeavouring to explain the reasons why the exchange between the
countries which pay in what is called bank money, and those which
pay in common currency, should generally appear to be in favour
of the former, and against the latter. The former pay in a
species of money, of which the intrinsic value is always the
same, and exactly agreeable to the standard of their respective
mints ; the latter is a species of money, of which the intrinsic
value is continually varying, and is almost always more or less
below that standard.

PART  II. - Of the Unreasonableness of those extraordinary
Restraints, upon other Principles.

In the foregoing part of this chapter, I have endeavoured to
show, even upon the principles of the commercial system, how
unnecessary it is to lay extraordinary restraints upon the
importation of goods from those countries with which the balance
of trade is supposed to be disadvantageous.

Nothing, however, can be more absurd than this whole doctrine of
the balance of trade, upon which, not only these restraints, but
almost all the other regulations of commerce, are founded. When
two places trade with one another, this doctrine supposes that,
if the balance be even, neither of them either loses or gains;
but if it leans in any degree to one side, that one of them
loses, and the other gains, in proportion to its declension from
the exact equilibrium.     Both suppositions are false. A trade,
which is forced by means of bounties and monopolies, may be, and
commonly is, disadvantageous to the country in whose favour it is
meant to be established, as I shall endeavour to show hereafter.
But that trade which, without force or constraint, is naturally
and regularly carried on between any two places, is always
advantageous, though not always equally so, to both.

By advantage or gain, I understand, not the increase of the
quantity of gold and silver, but that of the exchangeable value
of the annual produce of the land and labour of the country, or
the increase of the annual revenue of its inhabitants.

If the balance be even, and if the trade between the two places
consist altogether in the exchange of their native commodities,
they will, upon most occasions, not only both gain, but they will
gain equally, or very nearly equally ; each will, in this case,
afford a market for a part of the surplus produce of the other;
each will replace a capital which had been employed in raising
and preparing for the market this part of the surplus produce of
the other, and which had been distributed among, and given
revenue and maintenance to, a certain number of its inhabitants.
Some part of the inhabitants of each, therefore, will directly
derive their revenue and maintenance from the other. As the
commodities exchanged, too, are supposed to be of equal value, so
the two capitals employed in the trade will, upon most occasions,
be equal, or very nearly equal ; and both being employed in
raising the native commodities of the two countries, the revenue
and maintenance which their distribution will afford to the
inhabitants of each will be equal, or very nearly equal. This
revenue and maintenance, thus mutually afforded, will be greater
or smaller, in proportion to the extent of their dealings. If
these should annually amount to 100,000, for example, or to
1,000,000, on each side, each of them will afford an annual
revenue, in the one case, of 100,000, and, in the other, of
1,000,000, to the inhabitants of the other.

If their trade should be of such a nature, that one of them
exported to the other nothing but native commodities, while the
returns of that other consisted altogether in foreign goods; the
balance, in this case, would still be supposed even, commodities
being paid for with commodities. They would, in this case too,
both gain, but they would not gain equally; and the inhabitants
of the country which exported nothing but native commodities,
would derive the greatest revenue from the trade. If England, for
example, should import from France nothing but the native
commodities of that country, and not having such commodities of
its own as were in demand there, should annually repay them by
sending thither a large quantity of foreign goods, tobacco, we
shall suppose, and East India goods ; this trade, though it would
give some revenue to the inhabitants of both countries, would
give more to those of France than to those of England. The whole
French capital annually employed in it would annually be
distributed among the people of France; but that part of the
English capital only, which was employed in producing the English
commodities with which those foreign goods were purchased, would
be annually distributed among the people of England. The greater
part of it would replace the capitals which had been employed in
Virginia, Indostan, and China, and which had given revenue and
maintenance to the inhabitants of those distant countries. If the
capitals were equal, or nearly equal, therefore, this employment
of the French capital would augment much more the revenue of the
people of France, than that of the English capital would the
revenue of the people of England. France would, in this case,
carry on a direct foreign trade of consumption with England;
whereas England would carry on a round-about trade of the same
kind with France. The different effects of a capital employed in
the direct, and of one employed in the round-about foreign trade
of consumption, have already been fully explained.

There is not, probably, between any two countries, a trade which
consists altogether in the exchange, either of native commodities
on both sides, or of native commodities on one side, and of
foreign goods on the other. Almost all countries exchange with
one another, partly native and partly foreign goods That country,
however, in whose cargoes there is the greatest proportion of
native, and the least of foreign goods, will always be the
principal gainer.

If it was not with tobacco and East India  goods, but with gold
and silver, that England paid for the commodities annually
imported from France, the balance, in this case, would be
supposed uneven, commodities not being paid for with commodities,
but with gold and silver. The trade, however, would in this case,
as in the foregoing, give some revenue to the inhabitants of both
countries, but more to those of France than to those of England.
It would give some revenue to those of England. The capital which
had been employed in producing the English goods that purchased
this gold and silver, the capital which had been distributed
among, and given revenue to, certain inhabitants of England,
would thereby be replaced, and enabled to continue that
employment. The whole capital of England would no more be
diminished by this exportation of gold and silver, than by the
exportation of an equal value of any other goods. On the
contrary, it would, in most cases, be augmented. No goods are
sent abroad but those for which the demand is sup- posed to be
greater abroad than at home, and of which the returns,
consequently, it is expected, will be of more value at home than
the commodities exported. If the tobacco which in England is
worth only 100,000, when sent to France, will purchase wine
which is in England worth 110,000, the exchange will augment the
capital of England by 10,000. If 100,000 of English gold, in
the same manner, purchase French wine, which in England is worth
110,000, this exchange will equally augment the capital of
England by 10,000. As a merchant, who has 110,000 worth of wine
in his cellar, is a richer man than he who has only 100,000
worth of tobacco in his warehouse, so is he likewise a richer man
than he who has only 100,000 worth of gold in his coffers. He
can put into motion a greater quantity of industry, and give
revenue, maintenance, and employment, to a greater number of
people, than either of the other two. But the capital of the
country is equal to the capital of all its different inhabitants;
and the quantity of industry which can be annually maintained in
it is equal to what all those different capitals can maintain.
Both the capital of the country, therefore, and the quantity of
industry which can be annually maintained in it, must generally
be augmented by this exchange. It would, indeed, be more
advantageous for England that it could purchase the wines of
France with its own hardware and broad cloth, than with either
the tobacco of Virginia, or the gold and silver of Brazil and
Peru. A direct foreign trade of consumption is always more
advantageous than a round-about one. But a round-about foreign
trade of consumption, which is carried on with gold and silver,
does not seem to be less advantageous than any other equally
round-about one. Neither is a country which has no mines, more
likely to be exhausted of gold and silver by this annual
exportation of those metals, than one which does not grow tobacco
by the like annual exportation of that plant. As a country which
has wherewithal to buy tobacco will never be long in want of it,
so neither will one be long in want of gold and silver which has
wherewithal to purchase those metals.

It is a losing trade, it is said, which a workman carries on with
the alehouse; and the trade which a manufacturing nation would
naturally carry on with a wine country, may be considered as a
trade of the same nature. I answer, that the trade with the
alehouse is not necessarily a losing trade. In its own nature it
is just as advantageous as any other, though, perhaps, somewhat
more liable to be abused. The employment of a brewer, and even
that of a retailer of fermented liquors, are as necessary
division's of labour as any other. It will generally be more
advantageous for a workman to buy of the brewer the quantity he
has occasion for, than to brew it himself ; and if he is a poor
workman, it will generally be more advantageous for him to buy it
by little and little of the retailer, than a large quantity of
the brewer. He may no doubt buy too much of either, as he may of
any other dealers in his neighbourhood; of the butcher, if he is
a glutton ; or of the draper, if he affects to be a beau among
his companions. It is advantageous to the great body of workmen,
notwithstanding, that all these trades should be free, though
this freedom may be abused in all of them, and is more likely to
be so, perhaps, in some than in others. Though individuals,
besides, may sometimes ruin their fortunes by an excessive
consumption of fermented liquors, there seems to be no risk that
a nation should do so. Though in every country there are many
people who spend upon such liquors more than they can afford,
there are always many more who spend less. It deserves to be
remarked, too, that if we consult experience, the cheapness of
wine seems to be a cause, not of drunkenness, but of sobriety.
The inhabitants of the wine countries are in general the soberest
people of Europe; witness the Spaniards, the Italians, and the
inhabitants of the southern provinces of France. People are
seldom guilty of excess in what is their daily fare. Nobody
affects the character of liberality and good fellowship, by being
profuse of a liquor which is as cheap as small beer. On the
contrary, in the countries which, either from excessive heat or
cold, produce no grapes, and where wine consequently is dear and
a rarity, drunkenness is a common vice, as among the northern
nations, and all those who live between the tropics, the negroes,
for example on the coast of Guinea. When a French regiment comes
from some of the northern provinces of France, where wine is
somewhat dear, to be quartered in the southern, where it is very
cheap, the  soldiers, I have frequently heard it observed, are at
first debauched by the cheapness and novelty of good wine ; but
after a few months residence, the greater part of them become as
sober as the rest of the inhabitants. Were the duties upon
foreign wines, and the excises upon malt, beer, and ale, to be
taken away all at once, it might, in the same manner, occasion in
Great Britain a pretty general and temporary drunkenness among
the middling and inferior ranks of people, which would probably
be soon followed by a permanent and almost universal sobriety. At
present, drunkenness is by no means the vice of people of
fashion, or of those who can easily afford the most expensive
liquors. A gentleman drunk with ale has scarce ever been seen
among us. The restraints upon the wine trade in Great Britain,
besides, do not so much seem calculated to hinder the people from
going, if I may say so, to the alehouse, as from going where they
can buy the best and cheapest liquor. They favour the wine trade
of Portugal, and discourage that of France. The Portuguese, it is
said, indeed, are better customers for our manufactures than the
French, and should therefore be encouraged in preference to them.
As they give us their custom, it is pretended we should give them
ours. The sneaking arts of underling tradesmen are thus erected
into political maxims for the conduct of a great empire ; for it
is the most underling tradesmen only who make it a rule to employ
chiefly their own customers. A great trader purchases his goods
always where they are cheapest and best, without regard to any
little interest of this kind.

By such maxims as these, however, nations have been taught that
their interest consisted in beggaring all their neighbours. Each
nation has been made to look with an invidious eye upon the
prosperity of all the nations with which it trades, and to
consider their gain as its own loss. Commerce, which ought
naturally to be, among nations as among individuals, a bond of
union and friendship, has become the most fertile source of
discord and animosity. The capricious ambition of kings and
ministers has not, during the present and the preceding century,
been more fatal to the repose of Europe, than the impertinent
jealousy of merchants and manufacturers. The violence and
injustice of the rulers of mankind is an ancient evil, for which,
I am afraid, the nature of human affairs can scarce admit of a
remedy : but the mean rapacity, the monopolizing spirit, of
merchants and manufacturers, who neither are, nor ought to be,
the rulers of mankind, though it cannot, perhaps, be corrected,
may very easily be prevented from disturbing the tranquillity of
anybody but themselves.

That it was the spirit of monopoly which originally both invented
and propagated this doctrine, cannot be doubted and they who
first taught it, were by no means such fools as they who believed
it. In every country it always is, and must be, the interest of
the great body of the people, to buy whatever they want of those
who sell it cheapest. The proposition is so very manifest, that
it seems ridiculous to take any pains to prove it ; nor could it
ever have been called in question, had not the interested
sophistry of merchants and manufacturers confounded the common
sense of mankind. Their interest is, in this respect, directly
opposite to that of the great body of the people. As it is the
interest of the freemen of a corporation to hinder the rest of
the inhabitants from employing any workmen but themselves; so it
is the interest of the merchants and manufacturers of every
country to secure to themselves the monopoly of the home market.
Hence, in Great Britain, and in most other European countries,
the extraordinary duties upon almost all goods imported by alien
merchants. Hence the high duties and prohibitions upon all those
foreign manufactures which can come into competition with our
own. Hence, too, the extraordinary restraints upon the
importation of almost all sorts of goods from those countries
with which the balance of trade is supposed to be
disadvantageous; that is, from those against whom national
animosity happens ta be most violently inflamed.

The wealth of neighbouring nations, however, though dangerous in
war and politics, is certainly advantageous in trade. In a state
of hostility, it may enable our enemies to maintain fleets and
armies superior to our own; but in a state of peace and commerce
it must likewise enable them to exchange with us to a greater
value, and to afford a better market, either for the immediate
produce of our own industry, or for whatever is purchased with
that produce. As a rich man is likely to be a better customer to
the industrious people in his neighbourhood, than a poor, so is
likewise a rich nation. A rich man, indeed, who is himself a
manufacturer, is a very dangerous neighbour to all those who deal
in the same way. All the rest of the neighbourhood, however, by
far the greatest number, profit by the good market which his
expense affords them. They even profit by his underselling the
poorer workmen who deal in the same way with him. The
manufacturers of a rich nation, in the same manner, may no doubt
be very dangerous rivals to those of their neighbours. This very
competition, however, is advantageous to the great body of the
people, who profit greatly, besides, by the good market which the
great expense of such a nation affords them in every other way.
Private people, who want to make a fortune, never think of
retiring to the remote and poor provinces of the country, but
resort either to the capital, or to some of the great commercial
towns. They know, that where little wealth circulates, there is
little to be got; but that where a great deal is in motion, some
share of it may fall to them. The same maxim which would in this
manner direct the common sense of one, or ten, or twenty
individuals, should regulate the judgment of one, or ten, or
twenty millions, and should make a whole nation regard the riches
of its neighbours, as a probable cause and occasion for itself to
acquire riches. A nation that would enrich itself by foreign
trade, is certainly most likely to do so, when its neighbours are
all rich, industrious and commercial nations. A great nation,
surrounded on all sides by wandering savages and poor barbarians,
might, no doubt, acquire riches by the cultivation of its own
lands, and by its own interior commerce, but not by foreign
trade. It seems to have been in this manner that the ancient
Egyptians and the modern Chinese acquired their great wealth. The
ancient Egyptians, it is said, neglected foreign commerce, and
the modem Chinese, it is known, hold it in the utmost contempt,
and scarce deign to afford it the decent protection of the laws.
The modern maxims of foreign commerce, by aiming at the
impoverishment of all our neighbours, so far as they are capable
of producing their intended effect, tend to render that very
commerce insignificant and contemptible.

It is in consequence of these maxims, that the commerce between
France and England has, in both countries, been subjected to so
many discouragements and restraints. If those two countries,
however, were to consider their real interest, without either
mercantile jealousy or national animosity, the commerce of France
might be more advantageous to Great Britain than that of any
other country, and, for the same reason, that of Great Britain to
France. France is the nearest neighbour to Great Britain. In the
trade between the southern coast of England and the northern and
north-western coast of France, the returns might be expected, in
the same manner as in the inland trade, four, five, or six times
in the year. The capital, therefore, employed in this trade
could, in each of the two countries, keep in motion four, five,
or six times the quantity of industry, and afford employment and
subsistence to four, five, or six times the number of people,
which all equal capital could do in the greater part of the other
branches of foreign trade. Between the parts of France and Great
Britain most remote from one another, the returns might be
expected, at least, once in the year ; and even this trade would
so far be at least equally advantageous, as the greater part of
the other branches of our foreign European trade. It would be, at
least, three times more advantageous than the boasted trade with
our North American colonies, in which the returns were seldom
made in less than three years, frequently not in less than four
or five years. France, besides, is supposed to contain 24,000,000
of inhabitants. Our North American colonies were never supposed
to contain more than 3,000,000; and France is a much richer
country than North America; though, on account of the more
unequal distribution of riches, there is much more poverty and
beggary in the one country than in the other. France, therefore,
could afford a market at least eight times more extensive, and,
on account of the superior frequency of the returns,
four-and-twenty times more advantageous than that which our North
American colonies ever afforded. The trade of Great Britain would
be just as advantageous to France, and, in proportion to the
wealth, population, and proximity of the respective countries,
would have the same superiority over that which France carries on
with her own colonies. Such is the very great difference between
that trade which the wisdom of both nations has thought proper to
discourage, and that which it has favoured the most.

But the very same circumstances which would have rendered an open
and free commerce between the two countries so advantageous to
both, have occasioned the principal obstructions to that
commerce. Being nighbours, they are necessarily enemies, and the
wealth and power of each becomes, upon that account, more
formidable to the other; and what would increase the advantage of
national friendship, serves only to inflame the violence of
national animosity. They are both rich and industrious nations;
and the merchants and manufacturers of each dread the competition
of the skill and activity of those of the other. Mercantile
jealousy is excited, and both inflames, and is itself inflamed,
by the violence of national animosity, and the traders of both
countries have announced, with all the passionate confidence of
interested falsehood, the certain ruin of each, in consequence of
that unfavourable balance of trade, which, they pretend, would be
the infallible effect of an unrestrained commerce with the other.

There is no commercial country in Europe, of which the
approaching ruin has not frequently been foretold by the
pretended doctors of this system, from all unfavourably balance
of trade.     After all the anxiety, however, which they have
excited about this, after all the vain attempts of almost all
trading nations to turn that balance in their own favour, and
against their neighbours, it does not appear that any one nation
in Europe has been, in any respect, impoverished by this cause.
Every town and country, on the contrary, in proportion as they
have opened their ports to all nations, instead of being ruined
by this free trade, as the principles of the commercial system
would lead us to expect, have been enriched by it. Though there
are in Europe indeed, a few towns which, in same respects,
deserve the name of free ports, there is no country which does
so. Holland, perhaps, approaches the nearest to this character of
any, though still very remote from it; and Holland, it is
acknowledged, not only derives its whole wealth, but a great part
of its necessary subsistence, from foreign trade.

There is another balance, indeed, which has already been
explained, very different from the balance of trade, and which,
according as it happens to be either favourable or unfavourable,
necessarily occasions the prosperity or decay of every nation.
This is the balance of the annual produce and consumption. If the
exchangeable value of the annual produce, it has already been
observed, exceeds that of the annual consumption, the capital of
the society must annually increase in proportion to this excess.
The society in this case lives within its revenue; and what is
annually saved out of its revenue, is naturally added to its
capital, and employed so as to increase still further the annual
produce. If the exchangeable value of the annual produce, on the
contrary, fall short of the annual consumption, the capital of
the society must annually decay in prorportion to this
deficiency. The expense of the society, in this case, exceeds its
revenue, and necessarily encroaches upon its capital. Its
capital, therefore, must necessarily decay, and, together with
it, the exchangeable value of the annual produce of its industry.

This balance of produce and consumption is entirely different
from what is called the balance of trade. It might take place in
a nation which had no foreign trade, but which was entirely
separated from all the world. It may take place in the whole
globe of the earth, of which the wealth, population, and
improvement, may be either gradually increasing or gradually
decaying.

The balance of produce and consumption may be constantly in
favour of a nation, though what is called the balance of trade be
generally against it. A nation may import to a greater value than
it exports for half a century, perhaps, together; the gold and
silver which comes into it during all this time, may be all
immediately sent out of it; its circulating coin may gradually
decay, different sorts of paper money being substituted in its
place, and even the debts, too, which it contracts in the
principal nations with whom it deals, may be gradually
increasing; and yet its real wealth, the exchangeable value of
the annual produce of its lands and labour, may, during the same
period, have been increasing in a much greater proportion. The
state of our North American colonies, and of the trade which they
carried on with Great Britain, before the commencement of the
present disturbances, {This paragraph was written in the year
1775.} may serve as a proof that this is by no means an
impossible supposition.



