

IV. The trade of the merchant-carrier, or of the importer of
foreign corn, in order to export it again, contributes to the
plentiful supply of the home market. It is not, indeed, the
direct purpose of his trade to sell his corn there ; but he will
generally be willing to do so, and even for a good deal less
money than he might expect in a foreign market; because he saves
in this manner the expense of loading and unloading, of freight
and insurance. The inhabitants of the country which, by means of
the carrying trade, becomes the magazine and storehouse for the
supply of other countries, can very seldom be in want themselves.
Though the carrying trade must thus contribute to reduce the
average money price of corn in the home market, it would not
thereby lower its real value; it would only raise somewhat the
real value of silver.

The carrying trade was in effect prohibited in Great Britain,
upon all ordinary occasions, by the high duties upon the
importation of foreign corn, of the greater part of which there
was no drawback; and upon extraordinary occasions, when a
scarcity made it necessary to suspend those duties by temporary
statutes, exportation was always prohibited. By this system of
laws, therefore, the carrying trade was in effect prohibited.

That system of laws, therefore, which is connected with the
establishment of the bounty, seems to deserve no part of the
praise which has been bestowed upon it. The improvement and
prosperity of Great Britain, which has been so often ascribed to
those laws, may very easily be accounted for by other causes.
That security which the laws in Great Britain give to every man,
that he shall enjoy the fruits of his own labour, is alone
sufficient to make any country flourish, notwithstanding these
and twenty other absurd regulations of commerce ; and this
security was perfected by the Revolution, much about the same
time that the bounty was established. The natural effort of every
individual to better his own condition, when suffered to exert
itself with freedom and security, is so powerful a principle,
that it is alone, and without any assistance, not only capable of
carrying on the society to wealth and prosperity, but of
surmounting a hundred impertinent obstructions, with which the
folly of human laws too often encumbers its operations: though
the effect of those obstructions is always, more or less, either
to encroach upon its freedom, or to diminish its security. In
Great Britain industry is perfectly secure; and though it is far
from being perfectly free, it is as free or freer than in any
other part of Europe.

Though the period of the greatest prosperity and improvement of
Great Britain has been posterior to that system of laws which is
connected with the bounty, we must not upon that account, impute
it to those laws. It has been posterior likewise to the national
debt ; but the national debt has most assuredly not been the
cause of it.

Though the system of laws which is connected with the bounty, has
exactly the same tendency with the practice of Spain and
Portugal, to lower somewhat the value of the precious metals in
the country where it takes place; yet Great Britain is certainly
one of the richest countries in Europe, while Spain and Portugal
are perhaps amongst the most beggarly. This difference of
situation, however, may easily be accounted for from two
different causes. First, the tax in Spain, the prohibition in
Portugal of exporting gold and silver, and the vigilant police
which watches over the execution of those laws, must, in two very
poor countries, which between them import annually upwards of six
millions sterling, operate not only more directly, but much more
forcibly, in reducing the value of those metals there, than the
corn laws can do in Great Britain. And, secondly, this bad policy
is not in those countries counterbalanced by the general liberty
and security of the people. Industry is there neither free nor
secure; and the civil and ecclesiastical governments of both
Spain and Portugal are such as would alone be sufficient to
perpetuate their present state of poverty, even though their
regulations of commerce were as wise as the greatest part of them
are absurd and foolish.

The 13th of the present king, c. 43, seems to have established a
new system with regard to the corn laws, in many respects better
than the ancient one, but in one or two respects perhaps not
quite so good.

By this statute, the high duties upon importation for home
consumption are taken off, so soon as the price of middling wheat
rises to 48s. the quarter; that of middling rye, pease, or beans,
to 32s.; that of barley to 24s. ; and that of oats to 16s. ; and
instead of them, a small duty is imposed of only 6d upon the
quarter of wheat, and upon that or other grain in proportion.
With regard to all those different sorts of grain, but
particularly with regard to wheat, the home market is thus opened
to foreign supplies, at prices considerably lower than before.

By the same statute, the old bounty of 5s. upon the exportation
of wheat, ceases so soon as the price rises to 44s. the quarter,
instead of 48s. the price at which it ceased before; that of
2s:6d. upon the exportation of barley, ceases so soon as the
price rises to 22s. instead of 24s. the price at which it ceased
before ; that of 2s:6d. upon the exportation of oatmeal, ceases
so soon as the price rises to 14s. instead of 15s. the price at
which it ceased before. The bounty upon rye is reduced from
3s:6d. to 3s. and it ceases so soon as the price rises to 28s.
instead of 32s. the price at which it ceased before. If bounties
are as improper as I have endeavoured to prove them to be, the
sooner they cease, and the lower they are, so much the better.

The same statute permits, at the lowest prices, the importation
of corn in order to be exported again, duty free, provided it is
in the mean time lodged in a warehouse under the joint locks of
the king and the importer. This liberty, indeed, extends to no
more than twenty-five of the different ports of Great Britain.
They are, however, the principal ones; and there may not,
perhaps, be warehouses proper for this purpose in the greater
part of the others.

So far this law seems evidently an improvement upon the ancient
system.

But by the same law, a bounty of 2s. the quarter is given for the
exportation of oats, whenever the price does not exceed fourteen
shillings. No bounty had ever been given before for the
exportation of this grain, no more than for that of pease or
beans.

By the same law, too, the exportation of wheat is prohibited so
soon as the price rises to forty-four shillings the quarter; that
of rye so soon as it rises to twenty-eight shillings; that of
barley so soon as it rises to twenty-two shillings ; and that of
oats so soon as they rise to fourteen shillings. Those several
prices seem all of them a good deal too low; and there seems to
be an impropriety, besides, in prohibiting exportation altogether
at those precise prices at which that bounty, which was given in
order to force it, is withdrawn. The bounty ought certainly
either to have been withdrawn at a much lower price, or
exportation ought to have been allowed at a much higher.

So far, therefore, this law seems to be inferior to the ancient
system. With all its imperfections, however, we may perhaps say
of it what was said of the laws of Solon, that though not the
best in itself, it is the best which the interest, prejudices,
and temper of the times, would admit of. It may perhaps in due
time prepare the way for a better.





CHAPTER    VI.

OF TREATIES OF COMMERCE.

When a nation binds itself by treaty, either to permit the entry
of certain goods from one foreign country which it prohibits from
all others, or to exempt the goods of one country from duties to
which it subjects those of all others, the country, or at least
the merchants and manufacturers of the country, whose commerce is
so favoured, must necessarily derive great advantage from the
treaty. Those merchants and manufacturers enjoy a sort of
monopoly in the country which is so indulgent to them. That
country becomes a market, both more extensive and more
advantageous for their goods: more extensive, because the goods
of other nations being either excluded or subjected to heavier
duties, it takes off a greater quantity of theirs; more
advantageous, because the merchants of the favoured country,
enjoying a sort of monopoly there, will often sell their goods
for a better price than if exposed to the free competition of all
other nations.

Such treaties, however, though they may be advantageous to the
merchants and manufacturers of the favoured, are necessarily
disadvantageous to those of the favouring country. A monopoly is
thus granted against them to a foreign nation; and they must
frequently buy the foreign goods they have occasion for, dearer
than if the free competition of other nations was admitted. That
part of its own produce with which such a nation purchases
foreign goods, must consequently be sold cheaper; because, when
two things are exchanged for one another, the cheapness of the
one is a necessary consequence, or rather is the same thing, with
the dearness of the other. The exchangeable value of its annual
produce, therefore. is likely to be diminished by every such
treaty. This diminution, however, can scarce amount to any
positive loss, but only to a lessening of the gain which it might
otherwise make. Though it sells its goods cheaper than it
otherwise might do, it will not probably sell them for less than
they cost; nor, as in the case of bounties, for a price which
will not replace the capital employed in bringing them to market,
together with the ordinary profits of stock. The trade could not
go on long if it did. Even the favouring country, therefore, may
still gain by the trade, though less than if there was a free
competition.

Some treaties of commerce, however, have been supposed
advantageous, upon principles very different from these; and a
commercial country has sometimes granted a monopoly of this kind,
against itself, to certain goods of a foreign nation, because it
expected, that in the whole commerce between them, it would
annually sell more than it would buy, and that a balance in gold
and silver would be annually returned to it. It is upon this
principle that the treaty of commerce between England and
Portugal, concluded in 1703 by Mr Methuen, has been so much
commended. The following is a literal translation of that treaty,
which consists of three articles only.

ART.  I.

His sacred royal majesty of Portugal promises, both in his own
name and that of his successors, to admit for ever hereafter,
into Portugal, the woollen cloths, and the rest of the woollen
manufactures of the British, as was accustomed, till they were
prohibited by the law ; nevertheless upon this condition :

ART.  II.

That is to say, that her sacred royal majesty of Great Britain
shall, in her own name, and that of her successors, be obliged,
for ever hereafter, to admit the wines of the growth of Portugal
into Britain; so that at no time, whether there shall be peace or
war between the kingdoms of Britain and France, any thing more
shall be demanded for these wines by the name of custom or duty,
or by whatsoever other title, directly or indirectly, whether
they shall be imported into Great Britain in pipes or hogsheads,
or other casks, than what shall be demanded for the like quantity
or measure of French wine, deducting or abating a third part of
the custom or duty. But if, at any time, this deduction or
abatement of customs, which is to be made as aforesaid, shall in
any manner be attempted and prejudiced, it shall be just and
lawful for his sacred royal majesty of Portugal, again to
prohibit the woollen cloths, and the rest of the British woollen
manufactures.

ART.   III.

The most excellent lords the plenipotentiaries promise and take
upon themselves, that their above named masters shall ratify this
treaty; and within the space of two months the ratification shall
be exchanged.

By this treaty, the crown of Portugal becomes bound to admit the
English woollens upon the same footing as before the prohibition;
that is, not to raise the duties which had been paid before that
time. But it does not become bound to admit them upon any better
terms than those of any other nation, of France or Holland, for
example. The crown of Great Britain, on the contrary, becomes
bound to admit the wines of Portugal, upon paying only two-thirds
of the duty which is paid for those of France, the wines most
likely to come into competition with them. So far this treaty,
therefore, is evidently advantageous to Portugal, and
disadvantageous to Great Britain.

It has been celebrated, however, as a masterpiece of the
commercial policy of England. Portugal receives annually from the
Brazils a greater quantity of gold than can be employed in its
domestic commerce, whether in the shape of coin or of plate. The
surplus is too valuable to be allowed to lie idle and locked up
in coffers; and as it can find no advantageous market at home, it
must, notwithstanding; any prohibition, be sent abroad, and
exchanged for something for which there is a more advantageous
market at home. A large share of it comes annually to England, in
return either for English goods, or for those of other European
nations that receive their returns through England. Mr Barretti
was informed, that the weekly packet-boat from Lisbon brings, one
week with another, more than 50,000 in gold to England. The sum
had probably been exaggerated. It would amount to more than
2,600,000 a. year, which is more than the Brazils are supposed
to afford.

Our merchants were, some years ago, out of humour with the crown
of Portugal. Some privileges which had been granted them, not by
treaty, but by the free grace of that crown, at the solicitation,
indeed, it is probable, and in return for much greater favours,
defence and protection from the crown of Great Britain, had been
either infringed or revoked. The people, therefore, usually most
interested in celebrating the Portugal trade, were then rather
disposed to represent it as less advantageous than it had
commonly been imagined. The far greater part, almost the whole,
they pretended, of this annual importation of gold, was not on
account of Great Britain, but of other European nations; the
fruits and wines of Portugal annually imported into Great Britain
nearly compensating the value of the British goods sent thither.

Let us suppose, however, that the whole was on account of Great
Britain, and that it amounted to a still greater sum than Mr
Barretti seems to imagine ; this trade would not, upon that
account, be more advantageous than any other, in which, for the
same value sent out, we received an equal value of consumable
goods in return.

It is but a very small part of this importation which, it can be
supposed, is employed as an annual addition, either to the plate
or to the coin of the kingdom. The rest must all be sent abroad,
and exchanged for consumable goods of some kind or other. But if
those consumable goods were purchased directly with the produce
of English industry, it would be more for the advantage of
England, than first to purchase with that produce the gold of
Portugal, and afterwards to purchase with that gold those
consumable goods. A direct foreign trade of consumption is always
more advantageous than a round-about one; and to bring the same
value of foreign goods to the home market requires a much smaller
capital in the one way than in the ether. If a smaller share of
its industry, therefore, had been enmloyed in producing goods fit
for the Portugal market, and a greater in producing those lit for
the other markets, where those consumable goods for which there
is a demand in Great Britain are to be had, it would have been
more for the advantage of England. To procure both the gold which
it wants for its own use, and the consumable goods, would, in
this way, employ a much smaller capital than at present. There
would be a spare capital, therefore, to be employed for other
purposes, in exciting an additional quantity of industry, and in
raising a greater annual produce.

Though Britain were entirely excluded from the Portugal trade, it
could find very little difficulty in procuring all the annual
supplies of gold which it wants, either for the purposes of
plate, or of coin, or of foreign trade. Gold, like every other
commodity, is always somewhere or another to be got for its value
by those who have that value to give for it. The annual surplus
of gold in Portugal, besides, would still be sent abroad, and
though not carried away by Great Britain, would be carried away
by some other nation, which would be glad to sell it again for
its price, in the same manner as Great Britain does at present.
In buying gold of Portugal, indeed, we buy it at the first hand ;
whereas, in buying it of any other nation, except Spain, we
should buy it at the second, and might pay somewhat dearer. This
difference, however, would surely be too insignificant to deserve
the public attention.

Almost all our gold, it is said, comes from Portugal. With other
nations, the balance of trade is either against as, or not much
in our favour. But we should remember, that the more gold we
import from one country, the less we must necessarily import from
all others. The effectual demand for gold, like that for every
other commodity, is in every country limited to a certain
quantity. If nine-tenths of this quantity are imported from one
country, there remains a tenth only to be imported from all
others. The more gold, besides, that is annually imported from
some particular countries, over and above what is requisite for
plate and for coin, the more must necessarily be exported to some
others: and the more that most insignificant object of modern
policy, the balance of trade, appears to be in our favour with
some particular countries, the more it must necessarily appear to
be against us with many others.

It was upon this silly notion, however, that England could not
subsist without the Portugal trade, that, towards the end of the
late war, France and Spain, without pretending either offence or
provocation, required the king of Portugal to exclude all British
ships from his ports, and, for the security of this exclusion, to
receive into them French or Spanish garrisons. Had the king of
Portugal submitted to those ignominious terms which his
brother-in-law the king of Spain proposed to him, Britain would
have been freed from a much greater inconveniency than the loss
of the Portugal trade, the burden of supporting a very weak ally,
so unprovided of every thing for his own defence, that the whole
power of England, had it been directed to that single purpose,
could scarce, perhaps, have defended him for another campaign.
The loss of the Portugal trade would, no doubt, have occasioned a
considerable embarrassment to the merchants at that time engaged
in it, who might not, perhaps, have found out, for a year or two,
any other equally advantageous method of employing their
capitals; and in this would probably have consisted all the
inconveniency which England could have suffered from this notable
piece of commercial policy.

The great annual importation of gold and silver is neither for
the purpose of plate nor of coin, but of foreign trade. A
round-about foreign trade of consumption can be carried on more
advantageously by means of these metals than of almost any other
goods. As they are the universal instruments of commerce, they
are more readily received in return for all commodities than any
other goods ; and, on account of their small bulk and great
value, it costs less to transport them backward and forward from
one place to another than almost any other sort of merchandize,
and they lose less of their value by being so transported. Of all
the commodities, therefore, which are bought in one foreign
country, for no other purpose but to be sold or exchanged again
for some other goods in another, there are none so convenient as
gold and silver. In facilitating all the different round-about
foreign trades of consumption which are carried on in Great
Britain, consists the principal advantage of the Portugal trade;
and though it is not a capital advantage, it is, no doubt, a
considerable one.

That any annual addition which, it can reasonably be supposed, is
made either to the plate or to the coin of the kingdom, could
require but a very small annual importation of gold and silver,
seems evident enough; and though we had no direct trade with
Portugal, this small quantity could always, somewhere or another,
be very easily got.

Though the goldsmiths trade be very considerable in Great
Britain, the far greater part of the new plate which they
annually sell, is made from other old plate melted down ; so that
the addition annually made to the whole plate of the kingdom
cannot be very great, and could require but a very small annual
importation.

It is the same case with the coin. Nobody imagines, I beileve,
that even the greater part of the annual coinage, amounting, for
ten years together, before the late reformation of the gold coin,
to upwards of 800,000 a-year in gold, was an annual addition to
the money before current in the kingdom. In a country where the
expense of the coinage is defrayed by the government, the value
of the coin, even when it contains its full standard weight of
gold and silver, can never be much greater than that of an equal
quantity of those metals uncoined, because it requires only the
trouble of going to the mint, and the delay, perhaps, of a few
weeks, to procure for any quantity of uncoined gold and silver an
equal quantity of those metals in coin; but in every country the
greater part of the current coin is almost always more or less
worn, or otherwise degenerated from its standard. In Great
Britain it was, before the late reformation, a good deal so, the
gold being more than two per cent., and the silver more than
eight per cent. below its standard weight. But if forty-four
guineas and a-half, containing their full standard weight, a
pound weight of gold, could purchase very little more than a
pound weight of uncoined gold; forty-four guineas and a-half,
wanting a part of their weight, could not purchase a pound
weight, and something was to be added, in order to make up the
deficiency. The current price of gold bullion at market,
therefore, instead of being the same with the mint price, or
46:14:6, was then about 47:14s., and sometimes about 48. When
the greater part of the coin, however, was in this degenerate
condition, forty four guineas and a-half, fresh from the mint,
would purchase no more goods in the market than any other
ordinary guineas; because, when they came into the coffers of the
merchant, being confounded with other money, they could not
afterwards be distinguished without more trouble than the
difference was worth. Like other guineas, they were worth no more
than 46:14:6. If thrown into the melting pot, however, they
produced, without any sensible loss, a pound weight of standard
gold, which could be sold at any time for between 47:14s. and
48, either in gold or silver, as fit for all the purposes of
coin as that which had been melted down. There was an evident
profit, therefore, in melting down new-coined money; and it was
done so instantaneously, that no precaution of government could
prevent it. The operations of the mint were, upon this account,
somewhat like the web of Penelope; the work that was done in the
day was undone in the night. The mint was employed, not so much
in making daily additions to the coin, as in replacing the very
best part of it, which was daily melted down.

Were the private people who carry their gold and silver to the
mint to pay themselves for the coinage, it would add to the value
of those metals, in the same manner as the fashion does to that
of plate. Coined gold and silver would be more valuable than
uncoined. The seignorage, if it was not exorbitant, would add to
the bullion the whole value of the duty; because, the government
having everywhere the exclusive privilege of coining, no coin can
come to market cheaper than they think proper to afford it. If
the duty was exorbitant, indeed, that is, if it was very much
above the real value of the labour and expense requisite for
coinage, false coiners, both at home and abroad, might be
encouraged, by the great difference between the value of bullion
and that of coin, to pour in so great a quantity of counterfeit
money as might reduce the value of the government money. In
France, however, though the seignorage is eight per cent., no
sensible inconveniency of this kind is found to arise from it.
The dangers to which a false coiner is everywhere exposed, if he
lives in the country of which he counterfeits the coin, and to
which his agents or correspondents are exposed, if he lives in a
foreign country, are by far too great to be incurred for the sake
of a profit of six or seven per cent.

The seignorage in France raises the value of the coin higher than
in proportion to the quantity of pure gold which it contains.
Thus, by the edict of January 1726, the mint price of fine gold
of twenty-four carats was fixed at seven hundred and forty livres
nine sous and one denier one-eleventh the mark of eight Paris
ounces. {See Dictionnaire des Monnoies, tom. ii. article
Seigneurage, p. 439, par 81. Abbot de Bazinghen,
Conseiller-Commissaire en la Cour des Monnoies  Paris.} The gold
coin of France, making an allowance for the remedy of the mint,
contains twenty-one carats and three-fourths of fine gold, and
two carats one-fourth of alloy. The mark of standard gold,
therefore, is worth no more than about six hundred and
seventy-one livres ten deniers. But in France this mark of
standard gold is coined into thirty louis d'ors of twenty-four
livres each, or into seven hundred and twenty livres. The coin.
age, therefore, increases the value of a mark of standard gold
bullion, by the difference between six hundred and seventy-one
livres ten deniers and seven hundred and twenty livres, or by
forty-eight livres nineteen sous and two deniers.

A seignorage will, in many cases, take away altogether, and will
in all cases diminish, the profit of melting down the new coin.
This profit always arises from the difference between the
quantity of bullion which the common currency ought to contain
and that which it actually does contain. If this difference is
less than the seignorage, there will be loss instead of profit.
If it is equal to the seignorage, there will be neither profit
nor loss. If it is greater than the seignorage, there will,
indeed, be some profit, but less than if there was no seignorage.
If, before the late reformation of the gold coin, for example,
there had been a seignorage of five per cent. upon the coinage,
there would have been a loss of three per cent. upon the melting
down of the gold coin. If the seignorage had been two per cent.,
there would have been neither profit nor loss. If the seignorage
had been one per cent., there would have been a profit but of one
per cent. only, instead of two per cent. Wherever money is
received by tale, therefore, and not by weight, a seignorage is
the most effectual preventive of the melting down of the coin,
and, for the same reason, of its exportaticn. It is the best and
heaviest pieces that are commonly either melted down or exported,
because it is upon such that the largest profits are made.

The law for the encouragement of the coinage, by rendering it
duty-free, was first enacted during the reign of Charles II. for
a limited time, and afterwards continued, by different
prolongations, till 1769, when it was rendered perpetual. The
bank of England, in order to replenish their coffers with money,
are frequently obliged to carry bullion to the mint ; and it was
more for their interest, they probably imagined, that the coinage
should be at the expense of the government than at their own. It
was probably out of complaisance to this great company, that the
government agreed to render this law perpetual. Should the custom
of weighing gold, however, come to be disused, as it is very
likely to be on account of its inconveniency ; should the gold
coin of England come to be received by tale, as it was before the
late recoinage this great company may, perhaps, find that they
have, upon this, as upon some other occasions, mistaken their own
interest not a little.

Before the late recoinage, when the gold currency of England was
two per cent. below its standard weight, as there was no
seignorage, it was two per cent. below the value of that quantity
of standard gold bullion which it ought to have contained. When
this great company, therefore, bought gold bullion in order to
have it coined, they were obliged to pay for it two per cent.
more than it was worth after the coinage. But if there had been a
seignorage of two per cent. upon the coinage, the common gold
currency, though two per cent. below its standard weight, would,
notwithstanding, have been equal in value to the quantity of
standard gold which it ought to have contained ; the value of the
fashion compensating in this case the diminution of the weight.
They would, indeed, have had the seignorage to pay, which being
two per cent., their loss upon the whole transaction would have
been two per cent., exactly the same, but no greater than it
actually was.

If the seignorage had been five per cent. and the gold currency
only two per cent. below its standard weight, the bank would, in
this case, have gained three per cent. upon the price of the
bullion ; but as they would have had a seignorage of five per
cent. to pay upon the coinage, their loss upon the whole
transaction would, in the same manner, have been exactly two per
cent.

If the seignorage had been only one per cent., and the gold
currency two per cent. below its standard weight, the bank would,
in this case, have lost only one per cent. upon the price of the
bullion; but as they would likewise have had a seignorage of one
per cent. to pay, their loss upon the whole transaction would
have been exactly two per cent., in the same manner as in all
other cases.

If there was a reasonable seignorage, while at the same time the
coin contained its full standard weight, as it has done very
nearly since the late recoinage, whatever the bank might lose by
the seignorage, they would gain upon the price of the bullion;
and whatever they might gain upon the price of the bullion, they
would lose by the seignorage. They would neither lose nor gain,
therefore, upon the whole transaction, and they would in this, as
in all the foregoing cases, be exactly in the same situation as
if there was no seignorage.

When the tax upon a commodity is so moderate as not to encourage
smuggling, the merchant who deals in it, though he advances, does
not properly pay the tax, as he gets it back in the price of the
commodity. The tax is finally paid by the last purchaser or
consumer. But money is a commodity, with regard to which every
man is a merchant. Nobody buys it but in order to sell it again;
and with regard to it there is, in ordinary cases, no last
purchaser or consumer. When the tax upon coinage, therefore, is
so moderate as not to encourage false coining, though every body
advances the tax, nobody finally pays it; because every body gets
it back in the advanced value of the coin.

A moderate seignorage, therefore, would not, in any case, augment
the expense of the bank, or of any other private persons who
carry their bullion to the mint in order to be coined; and the
want of a moderate seignonage does not in any case diminish it.
Whether there is or is not a seignorage, if the currency contains
its full standard weight, the coinage costs nothing to anybody ;
and if it is short of that weight, the coinage must always cost
the difference between the quantity of bullion which ought to be
contained in it, and that which actually is contained in it.

The government, therefore, when it defrays the expense of
coinage, not only incurs some small expense, but loses some small
revenue which it might get by a proper duty; and neither the
bank, nor any other private persons, are in the smallest degree
benefited by this useless piece of public generosity.

The directors of the bank, however, would probably be unwilling
to agree to the impositon of a seignorage upon the authority of a
speculation which promises them no gain, but only pretends to
insure them from any loss. In the present state of the gold coin,
and as long as it continues to be received by weight, they
certainly would gain nothing by such a change. But if the custom
of weighing the gold coin should ever go into disuse, as it is
very likely to do, and if the gold coin should ever fall into the
same state of degradation in which it was before the late
recoinage, the gain, or more properly the savings, of the bank,
inconsequence of the imposition of a seignorage, would probably
be very considerable. The bank of England is the only company
which sends any considerable quantity of bullion to the mint, and
the burden of the annual coinage falls entirely, or almost
entirely, upon it. If this annual coinage had nothing to do but
to repair the unavoidable losses and necessary wear and tear of
the coin, it could seldom exceed fifty thousand, or at most a
hundred thousand pounds. But when the coin is degraded below its
standard weight, the annual coinage must, besides this, fill up
the large vacuities which exportation and the melting pot are
continually making in the current coin. It was upon this account,
that during the ten or twelve years immediately preceding the
late reformation of the gold coin, the annual coinage amounted,
at an average, to more than 850,000. But if there had been a
seignorage of four or five per cent. upon the gold coin, it would
probably, even in the state in which things then were, have put
an effectual stop to the business both of exportation and of the
melting pot. The bank, instead of losing every year about two and
a half per cent. upon the bullion which was to be coined into
more than eight hundred and fifty thousand pounds, or incurring
an annual loss of more than 21,250 pounds, would not probably
have incurred the tenth part of that loss.

The revenue allotted by parliament for defraying the expense of
the coinage is but fourteen thousand pounds a-year; and the real
expense which it costs the government, or the fees of the
officers of the mint, do not, upon ordinary occasions, I am
assured, exceed the half of that sum. The saving of so very small
a sum, or even the gaining of another, which could not well be
much larger, are objects too inconsiderable, it may be thought,
to deserve the serious attention of government. But the saving of
eighteen or twenty thousand pounds a-year, in case of an event
which is not improbable, which has frequently happened before,
and which is very likely to happen again, is surely an object
which well deserves the serious attention, even of so great a
company as the bank of England.

Some of the foregoing reasonings and observations might, perhaps,
have been more properly placed in those chapters of the first
book which treat of the origin and use of money, and of the
difference between the real and the nominal price of commodities.
But as the law for the encouragement of coinage derives its
origin from those vulgar prejudices which have been introduced by
the mercantile system, I judged it more proper to reserve them
for this chapter. Nothing could be more agreeable to the spirit
of that system than a sort of bounty upon the production of
money, the very thing which, it supposes, constitutes the wealth
of every nation. It is one of its many admirable expedients for
enriching the country.





CHAPTER    VII.

OF COLONIES.

PART   I.

Of the Motives for Establishing New Colonies.

The interest which occasioned the first settlement of the
different European colonies in America and the West Indies, was
not altogether so plain and distinct as that which directed the
establishment of those of ancient Greece and Rome.

All the different states of ancient Greece possessed, each of
them, but a very small territory; and when the people in anyone
of them multiplied beyond what that territory could easily
maintain, a part of them were sent in quest of a new habitation,
in some remote and distant part of the world ; the warlike
neighbours who surrounded them on all sides, rendering it
difficult for any of them to enlarge very much its territory at
home. The colonies of the Dorians resorted chiefly to Italy and
Sicily, which, in the times preceding the foundation of Rome,
were inhabited by barbarous and uncivilized nations; those of the
Ionians and Aeolians, the two other great tribes of the Greeks,
to Asia Minor and the islands of the Aegean sea, of which the
inhabitants sewn at that time to have been pretty much in the
same state as those of Sicily and Italy. The mother city, though
she considered the colony as a child, at all times entitled to
great favour and assistance, and owing in return much gratitude
and respect, yet considered it as an emancipated child, over whom
she pretended to claim no direct authority or jurisdiction. The
colony settled its own form of government, enacted its own laws,
elected its own magistrates, and made peace or war with its
neighbours, as an independent state, which had no occasion to
wait for the approbation or consent of the mother city. Nothing
can be more plain and distinct than the interest which directed
every such establishment.

Rome, like most of the other ancient republics, was originally
founded upon an agrarian law, which divided the public territory,
in a certain proportion, among the different citizens who
composed the state. The course of human affairs, by marriage, by
succession, and by alienation, necessarily deranged this original
division, and frequently threw the lands which had been allotted
for the maintenance of many different families, into the
possession of a single person.    To remedy this disorder, for
such it was supposed to be, a law was made, restricting the
quantity of land which any citizen could possess to five hundred
jugera; about 350 English acres. This law, however, though we
read of its having been executed upon one or two occasions, was
either neglected or evaded, and the inequality of fortunes went
on continually increasing. The greater part of the citizens had
no land ; and without it the manners and customs of those times
rendered it difficult for a freeman to maintain his independency.
In the present times, though a poor man has no land of his own,
if he has a little stock, he may either farm the lands of
another, or he may carry on some little retail trade ; and if he
has no stock, he may find employment either as a country
labourer, or as an artificer. But among the ancient Romans, the
lands of the rich were all cultivated by slaves, who wrought
under an overseer, who was likewise a slave; so that a poor
freeman had little chance of being employed either as a farmer or
as a labourer. All trades and manufactures, too, even the retail
trade, were carried on by the slaves of the rich for the benefit
of their masters, whose wealth, authority, and protection, made
it difficult for a poor freeman to maintain the competition
against them. The citizens, therefore, who had no land, had
scarce any other means of subsistence but the bounties of the
candidates at the annual elections. The tribunes, when they had a
mind to animate the people against the rich and the great, put
them in mind of the ancient divisions of lands, and represented
that law which restricted this sort of private property as the
fundamental law of the republic. The people became clamorous to
get land, and the rich and the great, we may believe, were
perfectly determined not to give them any part of theirs. To
satisfy them in some measure, therefore, they frequently proposed
to send out a new colony. But conquering Rome was, even upon such
occasions, under no necessity of turning out her citizens to seek
their fortune, if one may so, through the wide world, without
knowing where they were to settle. She assigned them lands
generally in the conquered provinces of Italy, where, being
within the dominions of the republic, they could never form any
independent state, but were at best but a sort of corporation,
which, though it had the power of enacting bye-laws for its own
government, was at all times subject to the correction,
jurisdiction, and legislative authority of the mother city. The
sending out a colony of this kind not only gave some satisfaction
to the people, but often established a sort of garrison, too, in
a newly conquered province, of which the obedience might
otherwise have been doubtful. A Roman colony, therefore, whether
we consider the nature of the establishment itself, or the
motives for making it, was altogether different from a Greek one.
The words, accordingly, which in the original languages denote
those different establishments, have very different meanings. The
Latin word (colonia) signifies simply a plantation. The Greek
word (apoixia), on the contrary, signifies a separation of
dwelling, a departure from home, a going out of the house. But
though the Roman colonies were, in many respects, different from
the Greek ones, the interest which prompted to establish them was
equally plain and distinct. Both institutions derived their
origin, either from irresistible necessity, or from clear and
evident utility.

The establishment of the European colonies in America and the
West Indies arose from no necessity; and though the utility which
has resulted from them has been very great, it is not altogether
so clear and evident. It was not understood at their first
establishment, and was not the motive, either of that
establishment, or of the discoveries which gave occasion to it ;
and the nature, extent, and limits of that utility, are not,
perhaps, well understood at this day.

The Venetians, during the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries,
carried on a very advantageous commerce in spiceries and other
East India goods, which they distributed among the other nations
of Europe. They purchased them chiefly in Egypt, at that time
under the dominion of the Mamelukes, the enemies of the Turks, of
whom the Venetians were the enemies ; and this union of interest,
assisted by the money of Venice, formed such a connexion as gave
the Venetians almost a monopoly of the trade.

The great profits of the Venetians tempted the avidity of the
Portuguese. They had been endeavouring, during the course of the
fifteenth century, to find out by sea a way to the countries from
which the Moors brought them ivory and gold dust across the
desert. They discovered the Madeiras, the Canaries, the Azores,
the Cape de Verd islands, the coast of Guinea, that of Loango,
Congo, Angola, and Benguela, and, finally, the Cape of Good Hope.
They had long wished to share in the profitable traffic of the
Venetians, and this last discovery opened to them a probable
prospect of doing so. In 1497, Vasco de Gamo sailed from the port
of Lisbon with a fleet of four ships, and, after a navigation of
eleven months, arrived upon the coast of Indostan ; and thus
completed a course of discoveries which had been pursued with
great steadiness, and with very little interruption, for near a
century together.

Some years before this, while the expectations of Europe were in
suspense about the projects of the Portuguese, of which the
success appeared yet to be doubtful, a Genoese pilot formed the
yet more daring project of sailing to the East Indies by the
west. The situation of those countries was at that time very
imperfectly known in Europe. The few European travellers who had
been there, had magnified the distance, perhaps through
simplicity and ignorance ; what was really very great, appearing
almost infinite to those who could not measure it; or, perhaps,
in order to increase somewhat more the marvellous of their own
adventures in visiting regions so immensely remote from Europe.
The longer the way was by the east, Columbus very justly
concluded, the shorter it would be by the west. He proposed,
therefore, to take that way, as both the shortest and the surest,
and he had the good fortune to convince Isabella of Castile of
the probability of his project. He sailed from the port of Palos
in August 1492, near five years before the expedition of Vasco de
Gamo set out from Portugal; and, after a voyage of between two
and three months, discovered first some of the small Bahama or
Lucyan islands, and afterwards the great island of St. Domingo.

But the countries which Columbus discovered, either in this or in
any of his subsequent voyages, had no resemblance to those which
he had gone in quest of. Instead of the wealth, cultivation, and
populousness of China and Indostan, he found, in St. Domingo, and
in all the other parts of the new world which he ever visited,
nothing but a country quite covered with wood, uncultivated, and
inhabited only by some tribes of naked and miserable savages. He
was not very willing, however, to believe that they were not the
same with some of the countries described by Marco Polo, the
first European who had visited, or at least had left behind him
any description of China or the East Indies ; and a very slight
resemblance, such as that which he found between the name of
Cibao, a mountaim in St. Domingo, and that of Cipange, mentioned
by Marco Polo, was frequently sufficient to make him return to
this favourite prepossession, though contrary to the clearest
evidence. In his letters to Ferdinand and Isabella, he called the
countries which he had discovered the Indies. He entertained no
doubt but that they were the extremity of those which had been
described by Marco Polo, and that they were not very distant from
the Ganges, or from the countries which had been conquered by
Alexander. Even when at last convinced that they were different,
be still flattered himself that those rich countries were at no
great distance; and in a subsequent voyage, accordingly, went in
quest of them along the coast of Terra Firma, and towards the
Isthmus of Darien.

In consequence of this mistake of Columbus, the name of the
Indies has stuck to those unfortunate countries ever since; and
when it was at last clearly discovered that the new were
altogether different from the old Indies, the former were called
the West, in contradistinction to the latter, which were called
the East Indies.

It was of importance to Columbus, however, that the countries
which he had discovered, whatever they were, should be
represented to the court of Spain as of very great consequence ;
and, in what constitutes the real riches of every country, the
animal and vegetable productions of the soil, there was at that
time nothing which could well justify such a representation of
them.

The cori, something between a rat and a rabbit, and supposed by
Mr Buffon to be the same with the aperea of Brazil, was the
largest viviparous quadruped in St. Domingo. This species seems
never to have been very nurnerous; and the dogs and cats of the
Spaniards are said to have long ago almost entirely extirpated
it, as well as some other tribes of a still smaller size. These,
however, together with a pretty large lizard, called the ivana or
iguana, constituted the principal part of the animal food which
the land afforded.

The vegetable food of the inhabitants, though, from their want of
industry, not very abundant, was not altogether so scanty. It
consisted in Indian corn, yams, potatoes, bananas, etc., plants
which were then altogether unknown in Europe, and which have
never since been very much esteemed in it, or supposed to yield a
sustenance equal to what is drawn from the common sorts of grain
and pulse, which have been cultivated in this part of the world
time out of mind.

The cotton plant, indeed, afforded the material of a very
important manufacture, and was at that time, to Europeans,
undoubtedly the most valuable of all the vegetable productions of
those islands. But though, in the end of the fifteenth century,
the muslins and other cotton goods of the East Indies were much
esteemed in every part of Europe, the cotton manufacture itself
was not cultivated in any part of it. Even this production,
therefore, could not at that time appear in the eyes of Europeans
to be of very great consequence.

Finding nothing, either in the animals or vegetables of the newly
discovered countries which could justify a very advantageous
representation of them, Columbus turned his view towards their
minerals; and in the richness of their productions of this third
kingdom, he flattered himself he had found a full compensation
for the insignificancy of those of the other two. The little bits
of gold with which the inhabitants ornamented their dress, and
which, he was informed, they frequently found in the rivulets and
torrents which fell from the mountains, were sufficient to
satisfy him that those mountains abounded with the richest gold
mines. St. Domingo, therefore, was represented as a country
abounding with gold, and upon that account (according to the
prejudices not only of the present times, but of those times), an
inexhaustible source of real wealth to the crown and kingdom of
Spain. When Columbus, upon his return from his first voyage, was
introduced with a sort of triumphal honours to the sovereigns of
Castile and Arragon, the principal productions of the countries
which he had discovered were carried in solemn procession before
him. The only valuable part of them consisted in some little
fillets, bracelets, and other ornaments of gold, and in some
bales of cotton. The rest were mere objects of vulgar wonder and
curiosity ; some reeds of an extraordinary size, some birds of a
very beautiful plumage, and some stuffed skins of the huge
alligator and manati ; all of which were preceded by six or seven
of the wretched natives, whose singular colour and appearance
added greatly to the novelty of the show.

In consequence of the representations of Columbus, the council of
Castile determined to take possession of the countries of which
the inhabitants were plainly incapable of defending themselves.
The pious purpose of converting them to Christianity sanctified
the injustice of the project. But the hope of finding treasures
of gold there was the sole motive which prompted to undertake it;
and to give this motive the greater weight, it was proposed by
Columbus, that the half of all the gold and silver that should be
found there, should belong to the crown. This proposal was
approved of by the council.

As long as the whole, or the greater part of the gold which the
first adventurers imported into Europe was got by so very easy a
method as the plundering of the defenceless natives, it was not
perhaps very difficult to ,pay even this heavy tax ; but when the
natives were once fairly stript of all that they had, which, in
St. Domingo, and in all the other countries discovered by
Columbus, was done completely in six or eight years, and when, in
order to find more, it had become necessary to dig for it in the
mines, there was no longer any possibility of paying this tax.
The rigorous exaction of it, accordingly, first occasioned, it is
said, the total abandoning of the mines of St. Domingo, which
have never been wrought since. It was soon reduced, therefore, to
a third; then to a fifth; afterwards to a tenth; and at last to a
twentieth part of the gross produce of the gold mines. The tax
upon silver continued for a long time to be a fifth of the gross
produce. It was reduced to a tenth only in the course of the
present century. But the first adventurers do not appear to have
been much interested about silver. Nothing less precious than
gold seemed worthy of their attention.

All the other enterprizes of the Spaniards in the New World,
subsequent to those of Columbus, seem to have been prompted by
the same motive. It was the sacred thirst of gold that carried
Ovieda, Nicuessa, and Vasco Nugnes de Balboa, to the Isthmus of
Darien ; that carried Cortes to Mexico, Almagro and Pizarro to
Chili and Peru. When those adventurers arrived upon any unknown
coast, their first inquiry was always if there was any gold to be
found there ; and according to the information which they
received concerning this particular, they determined either to
quit the country or to settle in it.

Of all those expensive and uncertain projects, however, which
bring bankruptcy upon the greater part of the people who engage
in them, there is none, perhaps, more perfectly ruinous than the
search after new silver and gold mines. It is, perhaps, the most
disadvantageous lottery in the world, or the one in which the
gain of those who draw the prizes bears the least proportion to
the loss of those who draw the blanks; for though the prizes are
few, and the blanks many, the common price of a ticket is the
whole fortune of a very rich man. Projects of mining, instead of
replacing the capital employed in them, together with the
ordinary profits of stock, commonly absorb both capital and
profit. They are the projects, therefore, to which, of all
others, a prudent lawgiver, who desired to increase the capital
of his nation, would least choose to give any extraordinary
encouragement, or to turn towards them a greater share of that
capital than what would go to them of its own accord. Such, in
reality, is the absurd confidence which almost all men have in
their own good fortune, that wherever there is the least
probability of success, too great a share of it is apt to go to
them of its own accord.

But though the judgment of sober reason and experience concerning
such projects has always been extremely unfavourable, that of
human avidity has commonly been quite otherwise. The same passion
which has suggested to so many people the absurd idea of the
philosopher's stone, has suggested to others the equally absurd
one of immense rich mines of gold and silver. They did not
consider that the value of those metals has, in all ages and
nations, arisen chiefly from their scarcity, and that their
scarcity has arisen from the very small quantities of them which
nature has anywhere deposited in one place, from the hard and
intractable substances with which she has almost everywhere
surrounded those small quantities, and consequently from the
labour and expense which are everywhere necessary in order to
penetrate, and get at them. They flattered themselves that veins
of those metals might in many places be found, as large and as
abundant as those which are commonly found of lead, or copper, or
tin, or iron. The dream of Sir Waiter Raleigh, concerning the
golden city and country of El Dorado, may satisfy us, that even
wise men are not always exempt from such strange delusions. More
than a hundred years after the death of that great man, the
Jesuit Gumila was still convinced of the reality of that
wonderful country, and expressed, with great warmth, and, I dare
say, with great sincerity, how happy he should be to carry the
light of the gospel to a people who could so well reward the
pious labours of their missionary.

In the countries first discovered by the Spaniards, no gold and
silver mines are at present known which are supposed to be worth
the working. The quantities of those metals which the first
adventurers are said to have found there, had probably been very
much magnified, as well as the fertility of the mines which were
wrought immediately after the first discovery. What those
adventurers were reported to have found, however, was sufficient
to inflame the avidity of all their countrymen. Every Spaniard
who sailed to America expected to find an El Dorado. Fortune,
too, did upon this what she has done upon very few other
occasions. She realized in some measure the extravagant hopes of
her votaries; and in the discovery and conquest of Mexico and
Peru (of which the one happened about thirty, and the other about
forty, years after the first expedition of Columbus), she
presented them with something not very unlike that profusion of
the precious metals which they sought for.

A project of commerce to the East Indies, therefore, gave
occasion to the first discovery of the West. A project of
conquest gave occasion to all the establishments of the Spaniards
in those newly discovered countries. The motive which excited
them to this conquest was a project of gold and silver mines; and
a course of accidents which no human wisdom could foresee,
rendered this project much more successful than the undertakers
had any reasonable grounds for expecting.

The first adventurers of all the other nations of Europe who
attempted to make settlements in America, were animated by the
like chimerical views; but they were not equally successful. It
was more than a hundred years after the first settlement of the
Brazils, before any silver, gold, or diamond mines, were
discovered there. In the English, French, Dutch, and Danish
colonies, none have ever yet been discovered, at least none that
are at present supposed to be worth the working. The first
English settlers in North America, however, offered a fifth of
all the gold and silver which should be found there to the king,
as a motive for granting them their patents. In the patents of
Sir Waiter Raleigh, to the London and Plymouth companies, to the
council of Plymouth, etc. this fifth was accordingly reserved to
the crown. To the expectation of finding gold and silver mines,
those first settlers, too, joined that of discovering a
north-west passage to the East Indies. They have hitherto been
disappointed in both.

PART   II.

Causes of the Prosperity of New Colonies.

The colony of a civilized nation which takes possession either of
a waste country, or of one so thinly inhabited that the natives
easily give place to the new settlers, advances more rapidly to
wealth and greatness than any other human society.

The colonies carry out with them a knowledge of agriculture and
of other useful arts, superior to what can grow up of its own
accord, in the course of many centuries, among savage and
barbarous nations. They carry out with them, too, the habit of
subordination, some notion of the regular government which takes
place in their own country, of the system of laws which support
it, and of a regular administration of justice; and they
naturally establish something of the same kind in the new
settlement. But among savage and barbarous nations, the natural
progress of law and government is still slower than the natural
progress of arts, after law and government have been so far
established as is necessary for their protection. Every colonist
gets more land than he can possibly cultivate. He has no rent,
and scarce any taxes, to pay. No landlord shares with him in its
produce, and, the share of the sovereign is commonly but a
trifle. He has every motive to render as great as possible a
produce which is thus to be almost entirely his own. But his land
is commonly so extensive, that, with all his own industry, and
with all the industry of other people whom he can get to employ,
he can seldom make it produce the tenth part of what it is
capable of producing. He is eager, therefore, to collect
labourers from all quarters, and to reward them with the most
liberal wages. But those liberal wages, joined to the plenty and
cheapness of land, soon make those labourers leave him, in order
to become landlords themselves, and to reward with equal
liberality other labourers, who soon leave them for the same
reason that they left their first master. The liberal reward of
labour encourages marriage. The children, during the tender years
of infancy, are well fed and properly taken care of ; and when
they are grown up, the value of their labour greatly overpays
their maintenance. When arrived at maturity, the high price of
labour, and the low price of land, enable them to establish
themselves in the same manner as their fathers did before them.

In other countries, rent and profit eat up wages, and the two
superior orders of people oppress the inferior one ; but in new
colonies, the interest of the two superior orders obliges them to
treat the inferior one with more generosity and humanity, at
least where that inferior one is not in a state of slavery. Waste
lands, of the greatest natural fertility, are to be had for a
trifle. The increase of revenue which the proprietor, who is
always the undertaker, expects from their improvement,
constitutes his profit, which, in these circumstances, is
commonly very great; but this great profit cannot be made,
without employing the labour of other people in clearing and
cultivating the land; and the disproportion between the great
extent of the land and the small number of the people, which
commonly takes place in new colonies, makes it difficult for him
to get this labour. He does not, therefore, dispute about wages,
but is willing to employ labour at any price. The high wages of
labour encourage population. The cheapness and plenty of good
land encourage improvement, and enable the proprietor to pay
those high wages. In those wages consists almost the whole price
of the land ; and though they are high, considered as the wages
of labour, they are low, considered as the price of what is so
very valuable. What encourages the progress of population and
improvement, encourages that of real wealth and greatness.

The progress of many of the ancient Greek colonies towards wealth
and greatness seems accordingly to have been very rapid. In the
course of a century or two, several of them appear to have
rivalled, and even to have surpassed, their mother cities.
Syracuse and Agrigentum in Sicily, Tarentum and Locri in Italy,
Ephesus and Miletus in Lesser Asia, appear, by all accounts, to
have been at least equal to any of the cities of ancient Greece.
Though posterior in their establishment, yet all the arts of
refinement, philosophy, poetry, and eloquence, seem to have been
cultivated as early, and to have been improved as highly in them
as in any part of the mother country The schools of the two
oldest Greek philosophers, those of Thales and Pythagoras, were
established, it is remarkable, not in ancient Greece, but the one
in an Asiatic, the other in an Italian colony. All those colonies
had established themselves in countries inhabited by savage and
barbarous nations, who easily gave place to the new settlers.
They had plenty of good land; and as they were altogether
independent of the mother city, they were at liberty to manage
their own affairs in the way that they judged was most suitable
to their own interest.

The history of the Roman colonies is by no means so brilliant.
Some of them, indeed, such as Florence, have, in the course of
many ages, and after the fall of the mother city, grown up to be
considerable states. But the progress of no one of them seems
ever to have been very rapid. They were all established in
conquered provinces, which in most cases had been fully inhabited
before. The quantity of land assigned to each colonist was seldom
very considerable, and, as the colony was not independent, they
were not always at liberty to manage their own affairs in the way
that they judged was most suitable to their own interest.

In the plenty of good land, the European colonies established in
America and the West Indies resemble, and even greatly surpass,
those of ancient Greece. In their dependency upon the mother
state, they resemble those of ancient Rome; but their great
distance from Europe has in all of them alleviated more or less
the effects of this dependency. Their situation has placed them
less in the view, and less in the power of their mother country.
In pursuing their interest their own way, their conduct has upon
many occasions been overlooked, either because not known or not
understood in Europe; and upon some occasions it has been fairly
suffered and submitted to, because their distance rendered it
difficult to restrain it. Even the violent and arbitrary
government of Spain has, upon many occasions, been obliged to
recall or soften the orders which had been given for the
government of her colonies, for fear of a general insurrection.
The progress of all the European colonies in wealth, population,
and improvement, has accordingly been very great.

The crown of Spain, by its share of the gold and silver, derived
some revenue from its colonies from the moment of their first
establishment. It was a revenue, too, of a nature to excite in
human avidity the most extravagant expectation of still greater
riches. The Spanish colonies, therefore, from the moment of their
first establishment, attracted very much the attention of their
mother country; while those of the other European nations were
for a long time in a great measure neglected. The former did not,
perhaps, thrive the better in consequence of this attention, nor
the latter the worse in consequence of this neglect. In
proportion to the extent of the country which they in some
measure possess, the Spanish colonies are considered as less
populous and thriving than those of almost any other European
nation. The progress even of the Spanish colonies, however, in
population and improvement, has certainly been very rapid and
very great. The city of Lima, founded since the conquest, is
represented by Ulloa as containing fifty thousand inhabitants
near thirty years ago. Quito, which had been but a miserable
hamlet of Indians, is represented by the same author as in his
time equally populous. Gemel i Carreri, a pretended traveller, it
is said, indeed, but who seems everywhere to have written upon
extreme good information, represents the city of Mexico as
containing a hundred thousand inhabitants ; a number which, in
spite of all the exaggerations of the Spanish writers, is
probably more than five times greater than what it contained in
the time of Montezuma. These numbers exceed greatly those of
Boston, New York, and Philadelphia, the three greatest cities of
the English colonies. Before the conquest of the Spaniards, there
were no cattle fit for draught, either in Mexico or Peru. The
lama was their only beast of burden, and its strength seems to
have been a good deal inferior to that of a common ass. The
plough was unknown among them. They were ignorant of the use of
iron. They had no coined money, nor any established instrument of
commerce of any kind. Their commerce was carried on by barter. A
sort of wooden spade was their principal instrument of
agriculture. Sharp stones served them for knives and hatchets to
cut with; fish bones, and the hard sinews of certain animals,
served them with needles to sew with; and these seem to have been
their principal instruments of trade. In this state of things, it
seems impossible that either of those empires could have been so
much improved or so well cultivated as at present, when they are
plentifully furnished with all sorts of European cattle, and when
the use of iron, of the plough, and of many of the arts of
Europe, have been introduced among them. But the populousness of
every country must be in proportion to the degree of its
improvement and cultivation. In spite of the cruel destruction of
the natives which followed the conquest, these two great empires
are probably more populous now than they ever were before; and
the people are surely very different; for we must acknowledge, I
apprehend, that the Spanish creoles are in many respects superior
to the ancient Indians.

 After the settlements of the Spaniards, that of the Portuguese
in Brazil is the oldest of any European nation in America. But as
for a long time after the first discovery neither gold nor silver
mines were found in it, and as it afforded upon that account
little or no revenue to the crown, it was for a long time in a
great measure neglected ; and during this state of neglect, it
grew up to be a great and powerful colony. While Portugal was
under the dominion of Spain, Brazil was attacked by the Dutch,
who got possession of seven of the fourteen provinces into which
it is divided. They expected soon to conquer the other seven,
when Portugal recovered its independency by the elevation of the
family of Braganza to the throne. The Dutch, then, as enemies to
the Spaniards, became friends to the Portuguese, who were
likewise the enemies of the Spaniards. They agreed, therefore, to
leave that part of Brazil which they had not conquered to the
king of Portugal, who agreed to leave that part which they had
conquered to them, as a matter not worth disputing about, with
such good allies. But the Dutch government soon began to oppress
the Portuguese colonists, who, instead of amusing themselves with
complaints, took arms against their new masters, and by their own
valour and resolution, with the connivance, indeed, but without
any avowed assistance from the mother country, drove them out of
Brazil. The Dutch, therefore, finding it impossible to keep any
part of the country to themselves, were contented that it should
be entirely restored to the crown of Portugal. In this colony
there are said to be more than six hundred thousand people,
either Portuguese or descended from Portuguese, creoles,
mulattoes, and a mixed race between Portuguese and Brazilians. No
one colony in America is supposed to contain so great a number of
people of European extraction.

Towards the end of the fifteenth, and during the greater part of
the sixteenth century, Spain and Portugal were the two great
naval powers upon the ocean ; for though the commerce of Venice
extended to every part of Europe, its fleet had scarce ever
sailed beyond the Mediterranean. The Spaniards, in virtue of the
first discovery, claimed all America as their own; and though
they could not hinder so great a naval power as that of Portugal
from settling in Brazil, such was at that time the terror of
their name, that the greater part of the other nations of Europe
were afraid to establish themselves in any other part of that
great continent. The French, who attempted to settle in Florida,
were all murdered by the Spaniards. But the declension of the
naval power of this latter nation, in consequence of the defeat
or miscarriage of what they called their invincible armada, which
happened towards the end of the sixteenth century, put it out of
their power to obstruct any longer the settlements of the other
European nations. In the course of the seventeenth century,
therefore, the English, French, Dutch, Danes, and Swedes, all the
great nations who had any ports upon the ocean, attempted to make
some settlements in the new world.

The Swedes established themselves in New Jersey; and the number
of Swedish families still to be found there sufficiently
demonstrates, that this colony was very likely to prosper, had it
been protected by the mother country. But being neglected by
Sweden, it was soon swallowed up by the Dutch colony of New York,
which again, in 1674, fell under the dominion of the English.

The small islands of St. Thomas and Santa Cruz, are the only
countries in the new world that have ever been possessed by the
Danes. These little settlements, too, were under the government
of an exclusive company, which had the sole right, both of
purchasing the surplus produce of the colonies, and of supplying
them with such goods of other countries as they wanted, and
which, therefore, both in its purchases and sales, had not only
the power of oppressing them, but the greatest temptation to do
so. The government of an exclusive company of merchants is,
perhaps, the worst of all governments for any country whatever.
It was not, however, able to stop altogether the progress of
these colonies, though it rendered it more slow and languid. The
late king of Denmark dissolved this company, and since that time
the prosperity of these colonies has been very great.

The Dutch settlements in the West, as well as those in the East
Indies, were originally put under the government of an exclusive
company. The progress of some of them, therefore, though it has
been considerable in comparison with that of almost any country
that has been long peopled and established, has been languid and
slow in comparison with that of the greater part of new colonies.
The colony of Surinam, though very considerable, is still
inferior to the greater part of the sugar colonies of the other
European nations. The colony of Nova Belgia, now divided into the
two provinces of New York and New Jersey, would probably have
soon become considerable too, even though it had remained under
the government of the Dutch. The plenty and cheapness of good
land are such powerful causes of prosperity, that the very worst
government is scarce capable of checking altogether the efficacy
of their operation. The great distance, too, from the mother
country, would enable the colonists to evade more or less, by
smuggling, the monopoly which the company enjoyed against them.
At present, the company allows all Dutch ships to trade to
Surinam, upon paying two and a-half per cent. upon the value of
their cargo for a license; and only reserves to itself
exclusively, the direct trade from Africa to America, which
consists almost entirely in the slave trade. This relaxation in
the exclusive privileges of the company, is probably the
principal cause of that degree of prosperity which that colony at
present enjoys. Curacoa and Eustatia, the two principal islands
belonging to the Dutch, are free ports, open to the ships of all
nations; and this freedom, in the midst of better colonies, whose
ports are open to those of one nation only, has been the great
cause of the prosperity of those two barren islands.

The French colony of Canada was, during the greater part of the
last century, and some part of the present, under the government
of an exclusive company. Under so unfavourable an administration,
its progress was necessarily very slow, in comparison with that
of other new colonies; but it became much more rapid when this
company was dissolved, after the fall of what is called the
Mississippi scheme. When the English got possession of this
country, they found in it near double the number of inhabitants
which father Charlevoix had assigned to it between twenty and
thirty years before.     That jesuit had travelled over the whole
country, and had no inclination to represent it as less
inconsiderable than it really was.

The French colony of St. Domingo was established by pirates and
freebooters, who, for a long time, neither required the
protection, nor acknowledged the authority of France; and when
that race of banditti became so far citizens as to acknowledge
this authority, it was for a long time necessary to exercise it
with very great gentleness. During this period, the population
and improvement of this colony increased very fast. Even the
oppression of the exclusive company, to which it was for some
time subjected with all the other colonies of France, though it
no doubt retarded, had not been able to stop its progress
altogether. The course of its prosperity returned as soon as it
was relieved from that oppression. It is now the most important
of the sugar colonies of the West Indies, and its produce is said
to be greater than that of all the English sugar colonies put
together. The other sugar colonies of France are in general all
very thriving.

But there are no colonies of which the progress has been more
rapid than that of the English in North America.

Plenty of good land, and liberty to manage their own affairs
their own way, seem to be the two great causes of the prosperity
of all new colonies.

In the plenty of good land, the English colonies of North
America, though no doubt very abundantly provided, are, however,
inferior to those of the Spaniards and Portuguese, and not
superior to some of those possessed by the French before the late
war. But the political institutions of the English colonies have
been more favourable to the improvement and cultivation of this
land, than those of the other three nations.

First,      The engrossing of uncultivated land, though it has by
no means been prevented altogether, has been more restrained in
the English colonies than in any other. The colony law, which
imposes upon every proprietor the obligation of improving and
cultivating, within a limited time, a certain proportion of his
lands, and which, in case of failure, declares those neglected
lands grantable to any other person; though it has not perhaps
been very strictly executed, has, however, had some effect.

Secondly,     In Pennsylvania there is no right of primogeniture,
and lands, like moveables, are divided equally among all the
children of the family. In three of the provinces of New England,
the oldest has only a double share, as in the Mosaical law.
Though in those provinces, therefore, too great a quantity of
land should sometimes be engrossed by a particular individual, it
is likely, in the course of a generation or two, to be
sufficiently divided again. In the other English colonies,
indeed, the right of primogeniture takes place, as in the law of
England: But in all the English colonies, the tenure of the
lands, which are all held by free soccage, facilitates alienation
; and the grantee of an extensive tract of land generally finds
it for his interest to alienate, as fast as he can, the greater
part of it, reserving only a small quit-rent. In the Spanish and
Portuguese colonies, what is called the right of majorazzo takes
place in the succession of all those great estates to which any
title of honour is annexed. Such estates go all to one person,
and are in effect entailed and unalienable. The French colonies,
indeed, are subject to the custom of Paris, which, in the
inheritance of land, is much more favourable to the younger
children than the law of England. But, in the French colonies, if
any part of an estate, held by the noble tenure of chivalry and
homage, is alienated, it is, for a limited time, subject to the
right of redemption, either by the heir of the superior, or by
the heir of the family; and all the largest estates of the
country are held by such noble tenures, which necessarily
embarrass alienation. But, in a new colony, a great uncultivated
estate is likely to be much more speedily divided by alienation
than by succession. The plenty and cheapness of good land, it has
already been observed, are the principal causes of the rapid
prosperity of new colonies. The engrossing of land, in effect,
destroys this plenty and cheapness. The engrossing of
uncultivated land, besides, is the greatest obstruction to its
improvement ; but the labour that is employed in the improvement
and cultivation of land affords the greatest and most valuable
produce to the society. The produce of labour, in this case, pays
not only its own wages and the profit of the stock which employs
it, but the rent of the land too upon which it is employed. The
labour of the English colonies, therefore, being more employed in
the improvement and cultivation of land, is likely to afford a
greater and more valuable produce than that of any of the other
three nations, which, by the engrossing of land, is more or less
diverted towards other employments.

Thirdly,    The labour of the English colonists is not only
likely to afford a greater and more valuable produce, but, in
consequence of the moderation of their taxes, a greater
proportion of this produce belongs to themselves, which they may
store up and employ in putting into motion a still greater
quantity of labour. The Eng1ish colonists have never yet
contributed any thing towards the defence of the mother country,
or towards the support of its civil government. They themselves,
on the contrary, have hitherto been defended almost entirely at
the expense of the mother country ; but the expense of fleets and
armies is out of all proportion greater than the necessary
expense of civil government. The expense of their own civil
government has always been very moderate. It has generally been
confined to what was necessary for paying competent salaries to
the governor, to the judges, and to some other officers of
police, and for maintaining a few of the most useful public
works. The expense of the civil establishment of Massachusetts
Bay, before the commencement of the present disturbances, used to
be but about 18;000 a-year ; that of New Hampshire and Rhode
Island, 3500 each; that of Connecticut, 4000; that of New York
and Pennsylvania, 4500 each; that of New Jersey, 1200; that of
Virginia and South Carolina, 8000 each. The civil establishments
of Nova Scotia and Georgia are partly supported by an annual
grant of parliament; but Nova Scotia pays, besides, about 7000
a-year towards the public expenses of the colony, and Georgia
about 2500 a-year. All the different civil establishments in
North America, in short, exclusive of those of Maryland and North
Carolina, of which no exact account has been got, did not, before
the commencement of the present disturbances, cost the
inhabitants about 64,700 a-year; an ever memorable example, at
how small an expense three millions of people may not only be
governed but well governed. The most important part of the
expense of government, indeed, that of defence and protection,
has constantly fallen upon the mother country. The ceremonial,
too, of the civil government in the colonies, upon the reception
of a new governor, upon the opening of a new assembly, etc.
though sufficiently decent, is not accompanied with any expensive
pomp or parade. Their ecclesiastical government is conducted upon
a plan equally frugal. Tithes are unknown among them; and their
clergy, who are far from being numerous, are maintained either by
moderate stipends, or by the voluntary contributions of the
people. The power of Spain and Portugal, on the contrary, derives
some support from the taxes levied upon their colonies. France,
indeed, has never drawn any considerable revenue from its
colonies, the taxes which it levies upon them being generally
spent among them. But the colony government of all these three
nations is conducted upon a much more extensive plan, and is
accompanied with a much more expensive ceremonial. The sums spent
upon the reception of a new viceroy of Peru, for example, have
frequently been enormous. Such ceremonials are not only real
taxes paid by the rich colonists upon those particular occasions,
but they serve to introduce among them the habit of vanity and
expense upon all other occasions. They are not only very grievous
occasional taxes, but they contribute to establish perpetual
taxes, of the same kind, still more grievous ; the ruinous taxes
of private luxury and extravagance. In the colonies of all those
three nations, too, the ecclesiastical government is extremely
oppressive. Tithes take place in all of them, and are levied with
the utmost rigour in those of Spain and Portugal. All of them,
besides, are oppressed with a numerous race of mendicant friars,
whose beggary being not only licensed but consecrated by
religion, is a most grievous tax upon the poor people, who are
most carefully taught that it is a duty to give, and a very great
sin to refuse them their charity. Over and above all this, the
clergy are, in all of them, the greatest engrossers of land.

Fourthly,     In the disposal of their surplus produce, or of
what is over and above their own consumption, the English
colonies have been more favoured, and have been allowed a more
extensive market, than those of any other European nation. Every
European nation has endeavoured, more or less, to monopolize to
itself the commerce of its colonies, and, upon that account, has
prohibited the ships of foreign nations from trading to them, and
has prohibited them from importing European goods from any
foreign nation. But the manner in which this monopoly has been
exercised in different nations, has been very different.

Some nations have given up the whole commerce of their colonies
to an exclusive company, of whom the colonists were obliged to
buy all such European goods as they wanted, and to whom they were
obliged to sell the whole of their surplus produce. It was the
interest of the company, therefore, not only to sell the former
as dear, and to buy the latter as cheap as possible, but to buy
no more of the latter, even at this low price, than what they
could dipose of for a very high price in Europe. It was their
interest not only to degrade in all cases the value of the
surplus produce of the colony, but in many cases to discourage
and keep down the natural increase of its quantity. Of all the
expedients that can well be contrived to stunt the natural growth
of a new colony, that of an exclusive company is undoubtedly the
most effectual. This, however, has been the policy of Holland,
though their company, in the course of the present century, has
given up in many respects the exertion of their exclusive
privilege. This, too, was the policy of Denmark, till the reign
of the late king. It has occasionally been the policy of France ;
and of late, since 1755, after it had been abandoned by all other
nations on account of its absurdity, it has become the policy of
Portugal, with regard at least to two of the principal provinces
of Brazil, Pernambucco, and Marannon.

Other nations, without establishing an exclusive company, have
confined the whole commerce of their colonies to a particular
port of the mother country, from whence no ship was allowed to
sail, but either in a fleet and at a particular season, or, if
single, in consequence of a particular license, which in most
cases was very well paid for. This policy opened, indeed, the
trade of the colonies to all the natives of the mother country,
provided they traded from the proper port, at the proper season,
and in the proper vessels. But as all the different merchants,
who joined their stocks in order to fit out those licensed
vessels, would find it for their interest to act in concert, the
trade which was carried on in this manner would necessarily be
conducted very nearly upon the same principles as that of an
exclusive company. The profit of those merchants would be almost
equally exorbitant and oppressive. The colonies would be ill
supplied, and would be obliged both to buy very dear, and to sell
very cheap. This, however, till within these few years, had
always been the policy of Spain; and the price of all European
goods, accordingly, is said to have been enormous in the Spanish
West Indies. At Quito, we are told by Ulloa, a pound of iron sold
for about 4s:6d., and a pound of steel for about 6s:9d. sterling.
But it is chiefly in order to purchase European goods that the
colonies part with their own produce. The more, therefore, they
pay for the one, the less they really get for the other, and the
dearness of the one is the same thing with the cheapness of the
other. The policy of Portugal is, in this respect, the same as
the ancient policy of Spain, with regard to all its colonies,
except Pernambucco and Marannon; and with regard to these it has
lately adopted a still worse.

Other nations leave the trade of their colonies free to all their
subjects, who may carry it on from all the different ports of the
mother country, and who have occasion for no other license than
the common despatches of the custom-house. In this case the
number and dispersed situation of the different traders renders
it impossible for them to enter into any general combination, and
their competition is sufficient to hinder them from making very
exorbitant profits. Under so liberal a policy, the colonies are
enabled both to sell their own produce, and to buy the goods of
Europe at a reasonable price; but since the dissolution of the
Plymouth company, when our colonies were but in their infancy,
this has always been the policy of England. It has generally,
too, been that of France, and has been uniformly so since the
dissolution of what in England is commonly called their
Mississippi company. The profits of the trade, therefore, which
France and England carry on with their colonies, though no doubt
somewhat higher than if the competition were free to all other
nations, are, however, by no means exorbitant ; and the price of
European goods, accordingly, is not extravagantly high in the
greater past of the colonies of either of those nations.

In the exportation of their own surplus produce, too, it is only
with regard to certain commodities that the colonies of Great
Britain are confined to the market of the mother country. These
commodities having been enumerated in the act of navigation, and
in some other subsequent acts, have upon that account been called
enumerated commodities. The rest are called non-enumerated, and
may be exported directly to other countries, provided it is in
British or plantation ships, of which the owners and three
fourths of the mariners are British subjects

Among the non-enumerated commodities are some of the most
important productions of America and the West Indies, grain of
all sorts, lumber, salt provisions, fish, sugar, and rum.

Grain is naturally the first and principal object of the culture
of all new colonies. By allowing them a very extensive market for
it, the law encourages them to extend this culture much beyond
the consumption of a thinly inhabited country, and thus to
provide beforehand an ample subsistence for a continually
increasing population.

In a country quite covered with wood, where timber consequently
is of little or no value, the expense of clearing the ground is
the principal obstacle to improvement. By allowing the colonies a
very extensive market for their lumber, the law endeavours to
facilitate improvement by raising the price of a commodity which
would otherwise be of little value, and thereby enabling them to
make some profit of what would otherwise be mere expense.

In a country neither half peopled nor half cultivated, cattle
naturally multiply beyond the consumption of the inhabitants, and
are often, upon that account, of little or no value. But it is
necessary, it has already been shown, that the price of cattle
should bear a certain proportion to that of corn, before the
greater part of the lands of any country can be improved. By
allowing to American cattle, in all shapes, dead and alive, a
very extensive market, the law endeavours to raise the value of a
commodity, of which the high price is so very essential to
improvement. The good effects of this liberty, however, must be
somewhat diminished by the 4th of Geo. III. c. 15, which puts
hides and skins among the enumerated commodities, and thereby
tends to reduce the value of American cattle.

To increase the shipping and naval power of Great Britain by the
extension of the fisheries of our colonies, is an object which
the legizslature seems to have had almost constantly in view.
Those fisheries, upon this account, have had all the
encouragement which freedom can give them, and they have
flourished accordingly. The New England fishery, in particular,
was, before the late disturbances, one of the most important,
perhaps, in the world. The whale fishery which, notwithstanding
an extravagant bounty, is in Great Britain carried on to so
little purpose, that in the opinion of many people ( which I do
not, however, pretend to warrant), the whole produce does not
much exceed the value of the bounties which are annually paid for
it, is in New England carried on, without any bounty, to a very
great extent. Fish is one of the principal articles with which
the North Americans trade to Spain, Portugal, and the
Mediterranean.

Sugar was originally an enumerated commodity, which could only be
exported to Great Britain; but in 1751, upon a representation of
the sugar-planters, its exportation was permitted to all parts of
the world. The restrictions, however, with which this liberty was
granted, joined to the high price of sugar in Great Britain, have
rendered it in a great measure ineffectual. Great Britain and her
colonies still continue to be almost the sole market for all
sugar produced in the British plantations. Their consumption
increases so fast, that, though in consequence of the increasing
improvement of Jamaica, as well as of the ceded islands, the
importation of sugar has increased very greatly within these
twenty years, the exportation to foreign countries is said to be
not much greater than before.

Rum is a very important article in the trade which the Americans
carry on to the coast of Africa, from which they bring back negro
slaves in return.

If the whole surplus produce of America, in grain of all sorts,
in salt provisions, and in fish, had been put into the
enumeration, and thereby forced into the market of Great Britain,
it would have interferred too much with the produce of the
industry of our own people. It was probably not so much from any
regard to the interest of America, as from a jealousy of this
interference, that those important commodities have not only been
kept out of the enumeration, but that the importation into Great
Britain of all grain, except rice, and of all salt provisions,
has, in the ordinary state of the law, been prohibited.

The non-enumerated commodities could originally be exported to
all parts of the world. Lumber and rice having been once put into
the enumeration, when they were afterwards taken out of it, were
confined, as to the European market, to the countries that lie
south of Cape Finisterre. By the 6th of George III. c. 52, all
non-enumerated commodities were subjected to the like
restriction. The parts of Europe which lie south of Cape
Finisterre are not manufacturing countries, and we are less
jealous of the colony ships carrying home from them any
manufactures which could interfere with our own.

The enumerated commodities are of two sorts ; first, such as are
either the peculiar produce of America, or as cannot be produced,
or at least are not produced in the mother country. Of this kind
are molasses, coffee, cocoa-nuts, tobacco, pimento, ginger,
whalefins, raw silk, cotton, wool, beaver, and other peltry of
America, indigo, fustick, and other dyeing woods; secondly, such
as are not the peculiar produce of America, but which are, and
may be produced in the mother country, though not in such
quantities as to supply the greater part of her demand, which is
principally supplied from foreign countries. Of this kind are all
naval stores, masts, yards, and bowsprits, tar, pitch, and
turpentine, pig and bar iron, copper ore, hides and skins, pot
and pearl ashes. The largest importation of commodities of the
first kind could not discourage the growth, or interfere with the
sale, of any part of the produce of the mother country. By
confining them to the home market, our merchants, it was
expected, would not only be enabled to buy them cheaper in the
plantations, and consequently to sell them with a better profit
at home, but to establish between the plantations and foreign
countries an advantageous carrying trade, of which Great Britain
was necessarily to be the centre or emporium, as the European
country into which those commodities were first to be imported.
The importation of commodities of the second kind might be so
managed too, it was supposed, as to interfere, not with the sale
of those of the same kind which were produced at home, but with
that of those which were imported from foreign countries ;
because, by means of proper duties, they might be rendered always
somewhat dearer than the former, and yet a good deal cheaper than
the latter. By confining such commodities to the home market,
therefore, it was proposed to discourage the produce, not of
Great Britain, but of some foreign countries with which the
balance of trade was believed to be unfavourable to Great
Britain.

 The prohibition of exporting from the colonies to any other
country but Great Britain, masts, yards, and bowsprits, tar,
pitch, and turpentine, naturally tended to lower the price of
timber in the colonies, and consequently to increase the expense
of clearing their lands, the principal obstacle to their
improvement. But about the beginning of the present century, in
1703, the pitch and tar company of Sweden endeavoured to raise
the price of their commodities to Great Britain, by prohibiting
their exportation, except in their own ships, at their own price,
and in such quantities as they thought proper. In order to
counteract this notable piece of mercantile policy, and to render
herself as much as possible independent, not only of Sweden, but
of all the other northern powers, Great Britain gave a bounty
upon the importation of naval stores from America; and the effect
of this bounty was to raise the price of timber in America much
more than the confinement to the home market could lower it; and
as both regulations were enacted at the same time, their joint
effect was rather to encourage than to discourage the clearing of
land in America.

Though pig and bar iron, too, have been put among the enumerated
commodities, yet as, when imported from America, they are
exempted from considerable duties to which they are subject when
imported front any other country, the one part of the regulation
contributes more to encourage the erection of furnaces in America
than the other to discourage it. There is no manufacture which
occasions so great a consumption of wood as a furnace, or which
can contribute so much to the clearing of a country overgrown
with it.

The tendency of some of these regulations to raise the value of
timber in America, and thereby to facilitate the clearing of the
land, was neither, perhaps, intended nor understood by the
legislature. Though their beneficial effects, however, have been
in this respect accidental, they have not upon that account been
less real.

The most perfect freedom of trade is permitted between the
British colonies of America and the West Indies, both in the
enumerated and in the non-enumerated commodities Those colonies
are now become so populous and thriving, that each of them finds
in some of the others a great and extensive market for every part
of its produce. All of them taken together, they make a great
internal market for the produce of one another.

The liberality of England, however, towards the trade of her
colonies, has been confined chiefly to what concerns the market
for their produce, either in its rude state, or in what may be
called the very first stage of manufacture. The more advanced or
more refined manufactures, even of the colony produce, the
merchants and manufacturers of Great Britain chuse to reserve to
themselves, and have prevailed upon the legislature to prevent
their establishment in the colonies, sometimes by high duties,
and sometimes by absolute prohibitions.

While, for example, Muscovado sugars from the British plantations
pay, upon importation, only 6s:4d. the hundred weight, white
sugars pay 1:1:1; and refined, either double or single, in
loaves, 4:2:5 8/20ths. When those high duties were imposed,
Great Britain was the sole, and she still continues to be, the
principal market, to which the sugars of the British colonies
could be exported. They amounted, therefore, to a prohibition, at
first of claying or refining sugar for any foreign market, and at
present of claying or refining it for the market which takes off,
perhaps, more than nine-tenths of the whole produce. The
manufacture of claying or refining sugar, accordingly, though it
has flourished in all the sugar colonies of France, has been
little cultivated in any of those of England, except for the
market of the colonies themselves. While Grenada was in the hands
of the French, there was a refinery of sugar, by claying, at
least upon almost every plantation. Since it fell into those of
the English, almost all works of this kind have been given up;
and there are at present (October 1773), I am assured, not above
two or three remaining in the island. At present, however, by an
indulgence of the custom-house, clayed or refined sugar, if
reduced from loaves into powder, is commonly imported as
Muscovado.

While Great Britain encourages in America the manufacturing of
pig and bar iron, by exempting them from duties to which the like
commodities are subject when imported from any other country, she
imposes an absolute prohibition upon the erection of steel
furnaces and slit-mills in any of her American plantations. She
will not suffer her colonies to work in those more refined
manufactures, even for their own consumption ; but insists upon
their purchasing of her merchants and manufacturers all goods of
this kind which they have occasion for.

She prohibits the exportation from one province to another by
water, and even the canriage by land upon horseback, or in a
cart, of hats, of wools, and woollen goods, of the produce of
America; a regulation which effectually prevents the
establishment of any manufacture of such commodities for distant
sale, and confines the industry of her colonists in this way to
such coarse and household manufactures as a private family
commonly makes for its own use, or for that of some of its
neighbours in the same province.

To prohibit a great people, however, from making all that they
can of every part of their own produce, or from employing their
stock and industry in the way that they judge most advantageous
to themselves, is a manifest violation of the most sacred rights
of mankind. Unjust, however, as such prohibitions may be, they
have not hitherto been very hurtful to the colonies. Land is
still so cheap, and, consequently, labour so dear among them,
that they can import from the mother country almost all the more
refined or more advanced manufactures cheaper than they could
make them for themselves. Though they had not, therefore, been
prohibited from establishing such manufactures, yet, in their
present state of improvement, a regard to their own interest
would probably have prevented them from doing so. In their
present state of improvement, those prohibitions, perhaps,
without cramping their industry, or restraining it from any
employment to which it would have gone of its own accord, are
only impertinent badges of slavery imposed upon them, without any
sufficient reason, by the groundless jealousy of the merchants
and manufacturers of the mother country. In a more advanced
state, they might be really oppressive and insupportable.

Great Britain, too, as she confines to her own market some of the
most important productions of the colonies, so, in compensation,
she gives to some of them an advantage in that market, sometimes
by imposing higher duties upon the like productions when imported
from other countries, and sometimes by giving bounties upon their
importation from the colonies. In the first way, she gives an
advantage in the home market to the sugar, tobacco, and iron of
her own colonies; and, in the second, to their raw silk, to their
hemp and flax, to their indigo, to their naval stores, and to
their building timber. This second way of encouraging the colony
produce, by bounties upon importation, is, so far as I have been
able to learn, peculiar to Great Britain: the first is not.
Portugal does not content herself with imposing higher duties
upon the importation of tobacco from any other country, but
prohibits it under the severest penalties.

With regard to the importation of goods from Europe, England has
likewise dealt more liberally with her colonies than any other
nation.

Great Britain allows a part, almost always the half, generally a
larger portion, and sometimes the whole, of the duty which is
paid upon the importation of foreign goods, to be drawn back upon
their exportation to any foreign country. No independent foreign
country, it was easy to foresee, would receive them, if they came
to it loaded with the heavy duties to which almost all foreign
goods are subjected on their importation into Great Britain.
Unless, therefore, some part of those duties was drawn back upon
exportation, there was an end of the carrying trade; a trade so
much favoured by the mercantile system.

Our colonies, however, are by no means independent foreign
countries; and Great Britain having assumed to herself the
exclusive right of supplying them with all goods from Europe,
might have forced them (in the same manner as other countries
have done their colonies) to receive such goods loaded with all
the same duties which they paid in the mother country. But, on
the contrary, till 1763, the same drawbacks were paid upon the
exportation of the greater part of foreign goods to our colonies,
as to any independent foreign country. In 1763, indeed, by the
4th of Geo. III. c. 15, this indulgence was a good deal abated,
and it was enacted, " That no part of the duty called the old
subsidy should be drawn back for any goods of the growth,
production, or manufacture of Europe or the East Indies, which
should be exported from this kingdom to any British colony or
plantation in America; wines, white calicoes, and muslins,
excepted." Before this law, many different sorts of foreign goods
might have been bought cheaper in the plantations than in the
mother country, and some may still.

Of the greater part of the regulations concerning the colony
trade, the merchants who carry it on, it must be observed, have
been the principal advisers. We must not wonder, therefore, if,
in a great part of them, their interest has been more considered
than either that of the colonies or that of the mother country.
In their exclusive privilege of supplying the colonies with all
the goods which they wanted from Europe, and of purchasing all
such parts of their surplus produce as could not interfere with
any of the trades which they themselves carried on at home, the
interest of the colonies was sacrificed to the interest of those
merchants. In allowing the same drawbacks upon the re-exportation
of the greater part of European and East India goods to the
colonies, as upon their re-exportation to any independent
country, the interest of the mother country was sacrificed to it,
even according to the mercantile ideas of that interest. It was
for the interest of the merchants to pay as little as possible
for the foreign goods which they sent to the colonies, and,
consequently, to get back as much as possible of the duties which
they advanced upon their importation into Great Britain. They
might thereby be enabled to sell in the colonies, either the same
quantity of goods with a greater profit, or a greater quantity
with the same profit, and, consequently, to gain something either
in the one way or the other. It was likewise for the interest of
the colonies to get all such goods as cheap, and in as great
abundance as possible. But this might not always be for the
interest of the mother country. She might frequently suffer, both
in her revenue, by giving back a great part of the duties which
had been paid upon the importation of such goods; and in her
manufactures, by being undersold in the colony market, in
consequence of the easy terms upon which foreign manufactures
could be carried thither by means of those drawbacks. The
progress of the linen manufacture of Great Britain, it is
commonly said, has been a good deal retarded by the drawbacks
upon the re-exportation of German linen to the American colonies.

But though the policy of Great Britain, with regard to the trade
of her colonies, has been dictated by the same mercantile spirit
as that of other nations, it has, however, upon the whole, been
less illiberal and oppressive than that of any of them.

In every thing except their foreign trade, the liberty of the
English colonists to manage their own affairs their own way, is
complete. It is in every respect equal to that of their
fellow-citizens at home, and is secured in the same manner, by an
assembly of the representatives of the people, who claim the sole
right of imposing taxes for the support of the colony government.
The authority of this assembly overawes the executive power ; and
neither the meanest nor the most obnoxious colonist, as long as
he obeys the law, has any thing to fear from the resentment,
either of the governor, or of any other civil or military officer
in the province. The colony assemblies, though, like the house of
commons in England, they are not always a very equal
representation of the people, yet they approach more nearly to
that character ; and as the executive power either has not the
means to corrupt them, or, on account of the support which it
receives from the mother country, is not under the necessity of
doing so, they are, perhaps, in general more influenced by the
inclinations of their constituents. The councils, which, in the
colony legislatures, correspond to the house of lords in Great
Britain, are not composed of a hereditary nobility. In some of
the colonies, as in three of the governments of New England,
those councils are not appointed by the king, but chosen by the
representatives of the people. In none of the English colonies is
there any hereditary nobility. In all of them, indeed, as in all
other free countries, the descendant of an old colony family is
more respected than an upstart of equal merit and fortune; but he
is only more respected, and he has no privileges by which he can
be troublesome to his neighbours. Before the commencement of the
present disturbances, the colony assemblies had not only the
legislative, but a part of the executive power. In Connecticut
and Rhode Island, they elected the governor. In the other
colonies, they appointed the revenue officers, who collected the
taxes imposed by those respective assemblies, to whom those
officers were immediately responsible. There is more equality,
therefore, among the English colonists than among the inhabitants
of the mother country. Their manners are more re publican; and
their governments, those of three of the provinces of New England
in particular, have hitherto been more republican too.

The absolute governments of Spain, Portugal, and France, on the
contrary, take place in their colonies; and the discretionary
powers which such governments commonly delegate to all their
inferior officers are, on account of the great distance,
naturally exercised there with more than ordinary violence. Under
all absolute governments, there is more liberty in the capital
than in any other part of the country. The sovereign himself can
never have either interest or inclination to pervert the order of
justice, or to oppress the great body of the people. In the
capital, his presence overawes, more or less, all his inferior
officers, who, in the remoter provinces, from whence the
complaints of the people are less likely to reach him, can
exercise their tyranny with much more safety. But the European
colonies in America are more remote than the most distant
provinces of the greatest empires which had ever been known
before. The government of the English colonies is, perhaps, the
only one which, since the world began, could give perfect
security to the inhabitants of so very distant a province. The
administration of the French colonies, however, has always been
conducted with much more gentleness and moderation than that of
the Spanish and Portuguese. This superiority of conduct is
suitable both to the character of the French nation, and to what
forms the character of every nation, the nature of their
government, which, though arbitrary and violent in comparison
with that of Great Britain, is legal and free in comparison with
those of Spain and Portugal.

It is in the progress of the North American colonies, however,
that the superiority of the English policy chiefly appears. The
progress of the sugar colonies of France has been at least equal,
perhaps superior, to that of the greater part of those of
England; and yet the sugar colonies of England enjoy a free
government, nearly of the same kind with that which takes place
in her colonies of North America. But the sugar colonies of
France are not discouraged, like those of England, from refining
their own sugar; and what is still of greater importance, the
genius of their government naturally introduces a better
management of their negro slaves.

In all European colonies, the culture of the sugar-cane is
carried on by negro slaves. The constitution of those who have
been born in the temperate climate of Europe could not, it is
supposed, support the labour of digging the ground under the
burning sun of the West Indies ; and the culture of the
sugar-cane, as it is managed at present, is all hand labour ;
though, in the opinion of many, the drill plough might be
introduced into it with great advantage. But, as the profit and
success of the cultivation which is carried on by means of
cattle, depend very much upon the good management of those cattle
; so the profit and success of that which is carried on by slaves
must depend equally upon the good management of those slaves ;
and in the good management of their slaves the French planters, I
think it is generally allowed, are superior to the English. The
law, so far as it gives some weak protection to the slave against
the violence of his master, is likely to be better executed in a
colony where the government is in a great measure arbitrary, than
in one where it is altogether free. In ever country where the
unfortunate law of slavery is established, the magistrate, when
he protects the slave, intermeddles in some measure in the
management of the private property of the master ; and, in a free
country, where the master is, perhaps, either a member of the
colony assembly, or an elector of such a member, he dares not do
this but with the greatest caution and circumspection. The
respect which he is obliged to pay to the master, renders it more
difficult for him to protect the slave. But in a country where
the government is in a great measure arbitrary, where it is usual
for the magistrate to intermeddle even in the management of the
private property of individuals, and to send them, perhaps, a
lettre de cachet, if they do not manage it according to his
liking, it is much easier for him to give some protection to the
slave; and common humanity naturally disposes him to do so. The
protection of the magistrate renders the slave less contemptible
in the eyes of his master, who is thereby induced to consider him
with more regard, and to treat him with more gentleness. Gentle
usage renders the slave not only more faithful, but more
intelligent, and, therefore, upon a double account, more useful.
He approaches more to the condition of a free servant, and may
possess some degree of integrity and attachment to his master's
interest ; virtues which frequently belong to free servants, but
which never can belong to a slave, who is treated as slaves
commonly are in countries where the master is perfectly free and
secure.

That the condition of a slave is better under an arbitrary than
under a free government, is, I believe, supported by the history
of all ages and nations. In the Roman history, the first time we
read of the magistrate interposing to protect the slave from the
violence of his master, is under the emperors. When Vidius
Pollio, in the presence of Augustus, ordered one of his slaves,
who had committed a slight fault, to be cut into pieces and
thrown into his fish-pond, in order to feed his fishes, the
emperor commanded him, with indignation, to emancipate
immediately, not only that slave, but all the others that
belonged to him. Under the republic no magistrate could have had
authority enough to protect the slave, much less to punish the
master.

The stock, it is to be observed, which has improved the sugar
colonies of France, particularly the great colony of St Domingo,
has been raised almost entirely from the gradual improvement and
cultivation of those colonies. It has been almost altogether the
produce of the soil and of the industry of the colonists, or,
what comes to the same thing, the price of that produce,
gradually accumulated by good management, and employed in raising
a still greater produce. But the stock which has improved and
cultivated the sugar colonies of England, has, a great part of
it, been sent out from England, and has by no means been
altogether the produce of the soil and industry of the colonists.
The prosperity of the English sugar colonies has been in a great
measure owing to the great riches of England, of which a part has
overflowed, if one may say so, upon these colonies. But the
prosperity of the sugar colonies of France has been entirely
owing to the good conduct of the colonists, which must therefore
have had some superiority over that of the English; and this
superiority has been remarked in nothing so much as in the good
management of their slaves.

Such have been the general outlines of the policy of the
different European nations with regard to their colonies.

The policy of Europe, therefore, has very little to boast of,
either in the original establishment, or, so far as concerns
their internal government, in the subsequent prosperity of the
colonies of America.

Folly and injustice seem to have been the principles which
presided over and directed the first project of establishing
those colonies; the folly of hunting after gold and silver mines,
and the injustice of coveting the possession of a country whose
harmless natives, far from having ever injured the people of
Europe, had received the first adventurers with every mark of
kindness and hospitality.

The adventurers, indeed, who formed some of the latter
establishments, joined to the chimerical project of finding gold
and silver mines, other motives more reasonable and more
laudable; but even these motives do very little honour to the
policy of Europe.

The English puritans, restrained at home, fled for freedom to
America, and established there the four governments of New
England. The English catholics, treated with much greater
injustice, established that of Maryland ; the quakers, that of
Pennsylvania. The Portuguese Jews, persecuted by the inquisition,
stript of their fortunes, and banished to Brazil, introduced, by
their example, some sort of order and industry among the
transported felons and strumpets by whom that colony was
originally peopled, and taught them the culture of the
sugar-cane. Upon all these different occasions, it was not the
wisdom and policy, but the disorder and injustice of the European
governments, which peopled and cultivated America.

In effectuation some of the most important of these
establishments, the different governments of Europe had as little
merit as in projecting them. The conquest of Mexico was the
project, not of the council of Spain, but of a governor of Cuba ;
and it was effectuated by the spirit of the bold adventurer to
whom it was entrusted, in spite of every thing which that
governor, who soon repented of having trusted such a person,
could do to thwart it. The conquerors of Chili and Peru, and of
almost all the other Spanish settlements upon the continent of
America, carried out with them no other public encouragement, but
a general permission to make settlements and conquests in the
name of the king of Spain. Those adventures were all at the
private risk and expense of the adventurers. The government of
Spain contributed scarce any thing to any of them. That of
England contributed as little towards effectuating the
establishment of some of its most important colonies in North
America.

When those establishments were effectuated, and had become so
considerable as to attract the attention of the mother country,
the first regulations which she made with regard to them, had
always in view to secure to herself the monopoly of their
commerce; to confine their market, and to enlarge her own at
their expense, and, consequently, rather to damp and discourage,
than to quicken and forward the course of their prosperity. In
the different ways in which this monopoly has been exercised,
consists one of the most essential differences in the policy of
the different European nations with regard to their colonies. The
best of them all, that of England, is only somewhat less
illiberal and oppressive than that of any of the rest.

In what way, therefore, has the policy of Europe contributed
either to the first establishment, or to the present grandeur of
the colonies of America ? In one way, and in one way only, it has
contributed a good deal. Magna virum mater! It bred and formed
the men who were capable of achieving such great actions, and of
laying the foundation of so great an empire ; and there is no
other quarter of the world; of which the policy is capable of
forming, or has ever actually, and in fact, formed such men. The
colonies owe to the policy of Europe the education and great
views of their active and enterprizing founders; and some of the
greatest and most important of them, so far as concerns their
internal government, owe to it scarce anything else.

PART     III.

Of the Advantages which Europe has derived From the Discovery of
America, and from that of a Passage to the East Indies by the
Cape of Good Hope.

Such are the advantages which the colonies of America have
derived from the policy of Europe.

What are those which Europe has derived from the discovery and
colonization of America?

Those advantages may be divided, first, into the general
advantages which Europe, considered as one great country, has
derived from those great events; and, secondly, into the
particular advantages which each colonizing country has derived
from the colonies which particularly belong to it, in consequence
of the authority or dominion which it exercises over them.

The general advantages which Europe, considered as one great
country, has derived from the discovery and colonization of
America, consist, first, in the increase of its enjoyments ; and,
secondly, in the augmentation of its industry.

The surplus produce of America imported into Europe, furnishes
the inhabitants of this great continent with a variety of
commodities which they could not otherwise have possessed ; some
for conveniency and use, some for pleasure, and some for ornament
; and thereby contributes to increase their enjoyments.

The discovery and colonization of America, it will readily be
allowed, have contributed to augment the industry, first, of all
the countries which trade to it directly, such as Spain,
Portugal, France, and England; and, secondly, of all those which,
without trading to it directly, send, through the medium of other
countries, goods to it of their own produce, such as Austrian
Flanders, and some provinces of Germany, which, through the
medium of the countries before mentioned, send to it a
considerable quantity of linen and other goods. All such
countries have evidently gained a more extensive market for their
surplus produce, and must consequently have been encouraged to
increase its quantity.

But that those great events should likewise have contributed to
encourage the industry of countries such as Hungary and Poland,
which may never, perhaps, have sent a single commodity of their
own produce to America, is not, perhaps, altogether so evident.
That those events have done so, however, cannot be doubted. Some
part of the produce of America is consumed in Hungary and Poland,
and there is some demand there for the sugar, chocolate. and
tobacco, of that new quarter of the world. But those commodities
must be purchased with something which is either the produce of
the industry of Hungary and Poland, or with something which had
been purchased with some part of that produce. Those commodities
of America are new values, new equivalents, introduced into
Hungary and Poland, to be exchanged there for the surplus produce
of these countries. By being carried thither, they create a new
and more extensive market for that surplus produce. They raise
its value, and thereby contribute to encourage its increase.
Though no part of it may ever be carried to America, it may be
carried to other countries, which purchase it with a part of
their share of the surplus produce of America, and it may find a
market by means of the circulation of that trade which was
originally put into motion by the surplus produce of America.

Those great events may even have contributed to increase the
enjoyments, and to augment the industry, of countries which not
only never sent any commodities to America, but never received
any from it. Even such countries may have received a greater
abundance of other commodities from countries, of which the
surplus produce had been augmented by means of the American
trade. This greater abundance, as it must necessarily have
increased their enjoyments, so it must likewise have augmented
their industry. A greater number of new equivalents, of some kind
or other, must have been presented to them to be exchanged for
the surplus produce of that industry. A more extensive market
must have been created for that surplus produce, so as to raise
its value, and thereby encourage its increase. The mass of
commodities annually thrown into the great circle of European
commerce, and by its various revolutions annually distributed
among all the different nations comprehended within it, must have
been augmented by the whole surplus produce of America. A greater
share of this greater mass, therefore, is likely to have fallen
to each of those nations, to have increased their enjoyments, and
augmented their industry.

The exclusive trade of the mother countries tends to diminish, or
at least to keep down below what they would otherwise rise to,
both the enjoyments and industry of all those nations in general,
and of the American colonies in particular. It is a dead weight
upon the action of one of the great springs which puts into
motion a great part of the business of mankind. By rendering the
colony produce dearer in all other countries, it lessens its
consumption, and thereby cramps the industry of the colonies, and
both the enjoyments and the industry of all other countries,
which both enjoy less when they pay more for what they enjoy, and
produce less when they get less for what they produce. By
rendering the produce of all other countries dearer in the
colonies, it cramps in the same manner the industry of all other
colonies, and both the enjoyments and the industry of the
colonies. It is a clog which, for the supposed benefit of some
particular countries, embarrasses the pleasures and encumbers the
industry of all other countries, but of the colonies more than of
any other. It not only excludes as much as possible all other
countries from one particular market, but it confines as much as
possible the colonies to one particular market; and the
difference is very great between being excluded from one
particular market when all others are open, and being confined to
one particular market when all others are shut up. The surplus
produce of the colonies, however, is the original source of all
that increase of enjoyments and industry which Europe derives
from the discovery and colonization of America, and the exclusive
trade of the mother countries tends to render this source much
less abundant than it otherwise would be.

The particular advantages which each colonizing country derives
from the colonies which particularly belong to it, are of two
different kinds ; first, those common advantages which every
empire derives from the provinces subject to its dominion ; and,
secondly, those peculiar advantages which are supposed to result
from provinces of so very peculiar a nature as the European
colonies of America.

The common advantages which every empire derives from the
provinces subject to its dominion consist, first, in the military
force which they furnish for its defence; and, secondly, in the
revenue which they furnish for the support of its civil
government. The Roman colonies furnished occasionally both the
one and the other. The Greek colonies sometimes furnished a
military force, but seldom any revenue. They seldom acknowledged
themselves subject to the dominion of the mother city. They were
generally her allies in war, but very seldom her subjects in
peace.

The European colonies of America have never yet furnished any
military force for the defence of the mother country. The
military force has never yet been sufficient for their own
defence; and in the different wars in which the mother countries
have been engaged, the defence of their colonies has generally
occasioned a very considerable distraction of the military force
of those countries. In this respect, therefore, all the European
colonies have, without exception, been a cause rather of weakness
than of strength to their respective mother countries.

The colonies of Spain and Portugal only have contributed any
revenue towards the defence of the mother country, or the support
of her civil government. The taxes which have been levied upon
those of other European nations, upon those of England in
particular, have seldom been equal to the expense laid out upon
them in time of peace, and never sufficient to defray that which
they occasioned in time of war. Such colonies, therefore, have
been a source of expense, and not of revenue, to their respective
mother countries.

The advantages of such colonies to their respective mother
countries, consist altogether in those peculiar advantages which
are supposed to result from provinces of so very peculiar a
nature as the European colonies of America; and the exclusive
trade, it is acknowledged, is the sole source of all those
peculiar advantages.

In consequence of this exclusive trade, all that part of the
surplus produce of the English colonies, for example, which
consists in what are called enumerated commodities, can be sent
to no other country but England. Other countries must afterwards
buy it of her. It must be cheaper, therefore, in England than it
can be in any other country, and must contribute more to increase
the enjoyments of England than those of any other country. It
must likewise contribute more to encourage her industry. For all
those parts of her own surplus produce which England exchanges
for those enumerated commodities, she must get a better price
than any other countries can get for the like parts of theirs,
when they exchange them for the same commodities. The
manufactures of England, for example, will purchase a greater
quantity of the sugar and tobacco of her own colonies than the
like manufactures of other countries can purchase of that sugar
and tobacco.  So far, therefore, as the manufactures of England
and those of other countries are both to be exchanged for the
sugar and tobacco of the English colonies, this superiority of
price gives an encouragement to the former beyond what the latter
can, in these circumstances, enjoy. The exclusive trade of the
colonies, therefore, as it diminishes, or at least keeps down
below what they would otherwise rise to, both the enjoyments and
the industry of the countries which do not possess it, so it
gives an evident advantage to the countries which do possess it
over those other countries.

This advantage, however, will, perhaps, be found to be rather
what may be called a relative than an absolute advantage, and to
give a superiority to the country which enjoys it, rather by
depressing the industry and produce of other countries, than by
raising those of that particular country above what they would
naturally rise to in the case of a free trade.

The tobacco of Maryland and Virginia, for example, by means of
the monopoly which England enjoys of it, certainly comes cheaper
to England than it can do to France to whom England commonly
sells a considerable part of it. But had France and all other
European countries been at all times allowed a free trade to
Maryland and Virginia, the tobacco of those colonies might by
this time have come cheaper than it actually does, not only to
all those other countries, but likewise to England. The produce
of tobacco, in consequcnce of a market so much more extensive
than any which it has hitherto enjoyed, might, and probably
would, by this time have been so much increased as to reduce the
profits of a tobacco plantation to their natural level with those
of a corn plantation, which it is supposed they are still
somewhat above. The price of tobacco might, and probably would,
by this time have fallen somewhat lower than it is at present. An
equal quantity of the commodities, either of England or of those
other countries, might have purchased in Maryland and Virginia a
greater quantity of tobacco than it can do at present, and
consequently have been sold there for so much a better price. So
far as that weed, therefore, can, by its cheapness and abundance,
increase the enjoyments, or augment the industry, either of
England or of any other country, it would probably, in the case
of a free trade, have produced both these effects in somewhat a
greater degree than it can do at present. England, indeed, would
not, in this case, have had any advantage over other countries.
She might have bought the tobacco of her colonies somewhat
cheaper, and consequently have sold some of her own commodities
somewhat dearer, than she actually does ; but she could neither
have bought the one cheaper, nor sold the other dearer, than any
other country might have done. She might, perhaps, have gained an
absolute, but she would certainly have lost a relative advantage.

In order, however, to obtain this relative advantage in the
colony trade, in order to execute the invidious and malignant
project of excluding, as much as possible, other nations from any
share in it, England, there are very probable reasons for
believing, has not only sacrificed a part of the absolute
advantage which she, as well as every other nation, might have
derived from that trade, but has subjected herself both to an
absolute and to a relative disadvantage in almost every other
branch of trade.

When, by the act of navigation, England assumed to herself the
monopoly of the colony trade, the foreign capitals which had
before been employed in it, were necessarily withdrawn from it.
The English capital, which had before carried on but a part of
it, was now to carry on the whole. The capital which had before
supplied the colonies with but a part of the goods which they
wanted from Europe, was now all that was employed to supply them
with the whole.     But it could not supply them with the whole;
and the goods with which it did supply them were necessarily sold
very dear. The capital which had before bought but a part of the
surplus produce of the colonies, was now all that was employed to
buy the whole. But it could not buy the whole at any thing near
the old price ; and therefore, whatever it did buy, it
necessarily bought very cheap. But in an employment of capital,
in which the merchant sold very dear, and bought very cheap, the
profit must have been very great, and much above the ordinary
level of profit in other branches of trade.  This superiority of
profit in the colony trade could not fail to draw from other
branches of trade a part of the capital which had before been
employed in them. But this revulsion of capital, as it must have
gradually increased the competition of capitals in the colony
trade, so it must have gradually diminished that competition in
all those other branches of trade ; as it must have gradually
lowered the profits of the one, so it must have gradually raised
those of the other, till the profits of all came to a new level,
different from, and somewhat higher, than that at which they had
been before.

This double effect of drawing capital from all other trades, and
of raising the rate of profit somewhat higher than it otherwise
would have been in all trades, was not only produced by this
monopoly upon its first establishment, but has continued to be
produced by it ever since.

First,    This monopoly has been continually drawing capital from
all other trades, to be employed in that of the colonies.

Though the wealth of Great Britain has increased very much since
the establishment of the act of navigation, it certainly has not
increased in the same proportion as that or the colonies. But the
foreign trade of every country naturally increases in proportion
to its wealth, its surplus produce in proportion to its whole
produce; and Great Britain having engrossed to herself almost the
whole of what may be called the foreign trade of the colonies,
and her capital not having increased in the same proportion as
the extent of that trade, she could not carry it on without
continually withdrawing from other branches of trade some part of
the capital which had before been employed in them, as well as
withholding from them a great deal more which would otherwise
have gone to them.     Since the establishment of the act of
navigation, accordingly, the colony trade has been continually
increasing, while many other branches of foreign trade,
particularly of that to other parts of Europe, have been
continually decaying. Our manufactures for foreign sale, instead
of being suited, as before the act of navigation, to the
neighbouring market of Europe, or to the more distant one of the
countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea, have the greater
part of them, been accommodated to the still more distant one of
the colonies; to the market in which they have the monopoly,
rather than to that in which they have many competitors. The
causes of decay in other branches of foreign trade, which, by Sir
Matthew Decker and other writers, have been sought for in the
excess and improper mode of taxation, in the high price of
labour, in the increase of luxury, etc. may all be found in the
overgrowth of the colony trade. The mercantile capital of Great
Britain, though very great, yet not being infinite, and though
greatly increased since the act of navigation, yet not being
increased in the same proportion as the colony trade, that trade
could not possibly be carried on without withdrawing some part of
that capital from other branches of trade, nor consequently
without some decay of those other branches.

England, it must be observed, was a great trading country, her
mercantile capital was very great, and likely to become still
greater and greater every day, not only before the act of
navigation had established the monopoly of the corn trade, but
before that trade was very considerable. In the Dutch war, during
the government of Cromwell, her navy was superior to that of
Holland ; and in that which broke out in the beginning of the
reign of Charles II., it was at least equal, perhaps superior to
the united navies of France and Holland. Its superiority,
perhaps, would scarce appear greater in the present times, at
least if the Dutch navy were to bear the same proportion to the
Dutch commerce now which it did then.     But this great naval
power could not, in either of those wars, be owing to the act of
navigation. During the first of them, the plan of that act had
been but just formed; and though, before the breaking out of the
second, it had been fully enacted by legal authority, yet no part
of it could have had time to produce any considerable effect, and
least of all that part which established the exclusive trade to
the colonies. Both the colonies and their trade were
inconsiderable then, in comparison of what they are how. The
island of Jamaica was an unwholesome desert, little inhabited,
and less cultivated. New York and New Jersey were in the
possession of the Dutch, the half of St. Christopher's in that of
the French. The island of Antigua, the two Carolinas,
Pennsylvania, Georgia, and Nova Scotia, were not planted.
Virginia, Maryland, and New England were planted; and though they
were very thriving colonies, yet there was not perhaps at that
time, either in Europe or America, a single person who foresaw,
or even suspected, the rapid progress which they have since made
in wealth, population, and improvement. The island of Barbadoes,
in short, was the only British colony of any consequence, of
which the condition at that time bore any resemblance to what it
is at present. The trade of the colonies, of which England, even
for some time after the act of navigation, enjoyed but a part
(for the act of navigation was not very strictly executed till
several years after it was enacted), could not at that time be
the cause of the great trade of England, nor of the great naval
power which was supported by that trade. The trade which at that
time supported that great naval power was the trade of Europe,
and of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea. But
the share which Great Britain at present enjoys of that trade
could not support any such great naval power. Had the growing
trade of the colonies been left free to all nations, whatever
share of it might have fallen to Great Britain, and a very
considerable share would probably have fallen to her, must have
been all an addition to this great trade of which she was before
in possession. In consequence of the monopoly, the increase of
the colony trade has not so much occasioned an addition to the
trade which Great Britain had before, as a total change in its
direction.

Secondly, This monopoly has necessarily contributed to keep up
the rate of profit, in all the different branches of British
trade, higher than it naturally would have been, had all nations
been allowed a free trade to the British colonies.

The monopoly of the colony trade, as it necessarily drew towards
that trade a greater proportion of the capital of Great Britain
than what would have gone to it of its own accord, so, by the
expulsion of all foreign capitals, it necessarily reduced the
whole quantity of capital employed in that trade below what it
naturally would have been in the case of a free trade. But, by
lessening the competition of capitals in that branch of trade, it
necessarily raised the rate of profit in that branch. By
lessening, too, the competition of British capitals in all other
branches of trade, it necessarily raised the rate of British
profit in all those other branches. Whatever may have been, at
any particular period since the establishment of the act of
navigation, the state or extent of the mercantile capital of
Great Britain, the monopoly of the colony trade must, during the
continuance of that state, have raised the ordinary rate of
British profit higher than it otherwise would have been, both in
that and in all the other branches of British trade. If, since
the establishment of the act of navigation, the ordinary rate of
British profit has fallen considerably. as it certainly has, it
must have fallen still lower, had not the monopoly established by
that act contributed to keep it up.

But whatever raises, in any country, the ordinary rate of profit
higher than it otherwise would be, necessarily subjects that
country both to an absolute, and to a relative disadvantage in
every branch of trade of which she has not the monopoly.

It subjects her to an absolute disadvantage ; because, in such
branches of trade, her merchants cannot get this greater profit
without selling dearer than they otherwise would do, both the
goods of foreign countries which they import into their own, and
the goods of their own country which they export to foreign
countries. Their own country must both buy dearer and sell
dearer; must both buy less, and sell less; must both enjoy less
and produce less, than she otherwise would do.

It subjects her to a relative disadvantage; because, in such
branches of trade, it sets other countries, which are not subject
to the same absolute disadvantage, either more above her or less
below her, than they otherwise would be. It enables them both to
enjoy more and to produce more, in proportion to what she enjoys
and produces. It renders their superiority greater, or their
inferiority less, than it otherwise would be. By raising the
price of her produce above what it otherwise would be, it enables
the merchants of other countries to undersell her in foreign
markets, and thereby to justle her out of almost all those
branches of trade, of which she has not the monopoly.

Our merchants frequently complain of the high wages of British
labour, as the cause of their manufactures being undersold in
foreign markets; but they are silent about the high profits of
stock. They complain of the extravagant gain of other people; but
they say nothing of their own. The high profits of British stock,
however, may contribute towards raising the price of British
manufactures, in many cases, as much, and in some perhaps more,
than the high wages of British labour.

It is in this manner that the capital of Great Britain, one may
justly say, has partly been drawn and partly been driven from the
greater part of the different branches of trade of which she has
not the monopoly ; from the trade of Europe, in particular, and
from that of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea.

It has partly been drawn from those branches of trade, by the
attraction of superior profit in the colony trade, in consequence
of the continual increase of that trade, and of the continual
insufficiency of the capital which had carried it on one year to
carry it on the next.

It has partly been driven from them, by the advantage which the
high rate of profit established in Great Britain gives to other
countries, in all the different branches of trade of which Great
Britain has not the monopoly.

As the monopoly of the colony trade has drawn from those other
branches a part of the British capital, which would otherwise
have been employed in them, so it has forced into them many
foreign capitals which would never have gone to them, had they
not been expelled from the colony trade. In those other branches
of trade, it has diminished the competition of British capitals,
and thereby raised the rate of British profit higher than it
otherwise would have been. On the contrary, it has increased the
competition of foreign capitals, and thereby sunk the rate of
foreign profit lower than it otherwise would have been. Both in
the one way and in the other, it must evidently have subjected
Great Britain to a relative disadvantage in all those other
branches of trade.

The colony trade, however, it may perhaps be said, is more
advantageous to Great Britain than any other; and the monopoly,
by forcing into that trade a greater proportion of the capital of
Great Britain than what would otherwise have gone to it, has
turned that capital into an employment, more advantageous to the
country than any other which it could have found.

The most advantageous employment of any capital to the country to
which it belongs, is that which maintains there the greatest
quantity of productive labour, and increases the most the annual
produce of the land and labour of that country. But the quantity
of productive labour which any capital employed in the foreign
trade of consumption can maintain, is exactly in proportion, it
has been shown in the second book, to the frequency of its
returns. A capital of a thousand pounds, for example, employed in
a foreign trade of consumption, of which the returns are made
regularly once in the year, can keep in constant employment, in
the country to which it belongs, a quantity of productive labour,
equal to what a thousand pounds can maintain there for a year. If
the returns are made twice or thrice in the year, it can keep in
constant employment a quantity of productive labour, equal to
what two or three thousand pounds can maintain there for a year.
A foreign trade of consumption carried on with a neighbouring,
is, upon that account, in general, more advantageous than one
carried on with a distant country ; and, for the same reason, a
direct foreign trade of consumption, as it has likewise been
shown in the second book, is in general more advantageous than a
round-about one.

But the monopoly of the colony trade, so far as it has operated
upon the employment of the capital of Great Britain, has, in all
cases, forced some part of it from a foreign trade of consumption
carried on with a neighbouring, to one carried on with a more
distant country, and in many cases from a direct foreign trade of
consumption to a round-about one.

First,    The monopoly of the colony trade has, in all cases,
forced some part of the capital of Great Britain from a foreign
trade of consumption carried on with a neighbouring, to one
carried on with a more distant country.

It has, in all cases, forced some part of that capital from the
trade with Europe, and with the countries which lie round the
Mediterranean sea, to that with the more distant regions of
America and the West Indies ; from which the returns are
necessarily less frequent, not only on account of the greater
distance, but on account of the peculiar circumstances of those
countries. New colonies, it has already been observed, are always
understocked. Their capital is always much less than what they
could employ with great profit and advantage in the improvement
and cultivation of their land. They have a constant demand,
therefore, for more capital than they have of their own ; and, in
order to supply the deficiency of their own, they endeavour to
borrow as much as they can of the mother country, to whom they
are, therefore, always in debt. The most common way in which the
colonies contract this debt, is not by borrowing upon bond of the
rich people of the mother country, though they sometimes do this
too, but by running as much in arrear to their correspondents,
who supply them with goods from Europe, as those correspondents
will allow them. Their annual returns frequently do not amount to
more than a third, and sometimes not to so great a proportion of
what they owe. The whole capital, therefore, which their
correspondents advance to them, is seldom returned to Britain in
less than three, and sometimes not in less than four or five
years. But a British capital of a thousand pounds, for example,
which is returned to Great Britain only once in five years, can
keep in constant employment only one-fifth part of the British
industry which it could maintain, if the whole was returned once
in the year; and, instead of the quantity of industry which a
thousand pounds could maintain for a year, can keep in constant
employment the quantity only which two hundred pounds can
maintain for a year. The planter, no doubt, by the high price
which he pays for the goods from Europe, by the interest upon the
bills which he grants at distant dates, and by the commission
upon the renewal of those which he grants at near dates, makes
up, and probably more than makes up, all the loss which his
correspondent can sustain by this delay. But, though he make up
the loss of his correspondent, he cannot make up that of Great
Britain. In a trade of which the returns are very distant, the
profit of the merchant may be as great or greater than in one in
which they are very frequent and near ; but the advantage of the
country in which he resides, the quantity of productive labour
constantly maintained there, the annual produce of the land and
labour, must always be much less. That the returns of the trade
to America, and still more those of that to the West Indies, are,
in general, not only more distant, but more irregular and more
uncertain, too, than those of the trade to any part of Europe, or
even of the countries which lie round the Mediterranean sea, will
readily he allowed, I imagine, by everybody who has any
experience of those different branches of trade.

Secondly,     The monopoly of the colony trade, has, in many
cases, forced some part of the capital of Great Britain from a
direct foreign trade of consumption, into a round-about one.

Among the enumerated commodities which can be sent to no other
market but Great Britain, there are several of which the quantity
exceeds very much the consumption of Great Britain, and of which,
a part, therefore, must be exported to other countries. But this
cannot be done without forcing some part of the capital of Great
Britain into a round-about foreign trade of consumption.
Maryland, and Virginia, for example, send annually to Great
Britain upwards of ninety-six thousand hogsheads of tobacco, and
the consumption of Great Britain is said not to exceed fourteen
thousand.     Upwards of eighty-two thousand hogsheads,
therefore, must be exported to other countries, to France, to
Holland, and, to the countries which lie round the Baltic and
Mediterranean seas.     But that part of the capital of Great
Britain which brings those eighty-two thousand hogsheads to Great
Britain, which re-exports them from thence to those other
countries, and which brings back from those other countries to
Great Britain either goods or money in return, is employed in a
round-about foreign trade of consumption; and is necessarily
forced into this employment, in order to dispose of this great
surplus. If we would compute in how many years the whole of this
capital is likely to come back to Great Britain, we must add to
the distance of the American returns that of the returns from
those other countries.      If, in the direct foreign trade of
consumption which we carry on with America, the whole capital
employed frequently does not come back in less than three or four
years, the whole capital employed in this round-about one is not
likely to come back in less than four or five. If the one can
keep in constant employment but a third or a fourth part of the
domestic industry which could be maintained by a capital returned
once in the year, the other can keep in constant employment but a
fourth or a fifth part of that industry. At some of the outports
a credit is commonly given to those foreign correspondents to
whom they export them tobacco. At the port of London, indeed, it
is commonly sold for ready money: the rule is Weigh and pay. At
the port of London, therefore, the final returns of the whole
round-about trade are more distant than the returns from America,
by the time only which the goods may lie unsold in the warehouse;
where, however, they may sometimes lie long enough. But, had not
the colonies been confined to the market of Great Britain for the
sale of their tobacco, very little more of it would probably have
come to us than what was necessary for the home consumption. The
goods which Great Britain purchases at present for her own
consumption with the great surplus of tobacco which she exports
to other countries, she would, in this case, probably have
purchased with the immediate produce of her own industry, or with
some part of her own manufactures. That produce, those
manufactures, instead of being almost entirely suited to one
great market, as at present, would probably have been fitted to a
great number of smaller markets. Instead of one great round-about
foreign trade of consumption, Great Britain would probably have
carried on a great number of small direct foreign trades of the
same kind. On account of the frequency of the returns, a part,
and probably but a small part, perhaps not above a third or a
fourth of the capital which at present carries on this great
round-about trade, might have been sufficient to carry on all
those small direct ones; might have kept inconstant employment an
equal quantity of British industry ; and have equally supported
the annual produce of the land and labour of Great Britain. All
the purposes of this trade being, in this manner, answered by a
much smaller capital, there would have been a large spare capital
to apply to other purposes; to improve the lands, to increase the
manufactures, and to extend the commerce of Great Britain; to
come into competition at least with the other British capitals
employed in all those different ways, to reduce the rate of
profit in them all, and thereby to give to Great Britain, in all
of them, a superiority over other countries, still greater than
what she at present enjoys.

The monopoly of the colony trade, too, has forced some part of
the capital of Great Britain from all foreign trade of
consumption to a carrying trade; and, consequently from
supporting more or less the industry of Great Britain, to be
employed altogether in supporting partly that of the colonies,
and partly that of some other countries.

The goods, for example, which are annually purchased with the
great surplus of eighty-two thousand hogsheads of tobacco
annually re-exported from Great Britain, are not all consumed in
Great Britain. Part of them, linen from Germany and Holland, for
example, is returned to the colonies for their particular
consumption. But that part of the capital of Great Britain which
buys the tobacco with which this linen is afterwards bought, is
necessarily withdrawn from supporting the industry of Great
Britain, to be employed altogether in supporting, partly that of
the colonies, and partly that of the particular countries who pay
for this tobacco with the produce of their own industry.


The monopoly of the colony trade, besides, by forcing towards it
a much greater proportion of the capital of Great Britain than
what would naturally have gone to it, seems to have broken
altogether that natural balance which would otherwise have taken
place among all the different branches of British industry. The
industry of Great Britain, instead of being accommodated to a
great number of small markets, has been principally suited to one
great market. Her commerce, instead of running in a great number
of small channels, has been taught to run principally in one
great channel. But the whole system of her industry and commerce
has thereby been rendered less secure; the whole state of her
body politic less healthful than it otherwise would have been. In
her present condition, Great Britain resembles one of those
unwholesome bodies in which some of the vital parts are
overgrown, and which, upon that account, are liable to many
dangerous disorders, scarce incident to those in which all the
parts are more properly proportioned. A small stop in that great
blood-vessel, which has been artificially swelled beyond its
natural dimensions, and through which an unnatural proportion of
the industry and commerce of the country has been forced to
circulate, is very likely to bring on the most dangerous
disorders upon the whole body politic. The expectation of a
rupture with the colonies, accordingly, has struck the people of
Great Britain with more terror than they ever felt for a Spanish
armada, or a French invasion. It was this terror, whether well or
ill grounded, which rendered the repeal of the stamp act, among
the merchants at least, a popular measure.     In the total
exclusion from the colony market, was it to last only for a few
years, the greater part of our merchants used to fancy that they
foresaw an entire stop to their trade; the greater part of our
master manufacturers, the entire ruin of their business; and the
greater part of our workmen, an end of their employment.     A
rupture with any of our neighbours upon the continent, though
likely, too, to occasion some stop or interruption in the
employments of some of all these different orders of people, is
foreseen, however, without any such general emotion. The blood,
of which the circulation is stopt in some of the smaller vessels,
easily disgorges itself into the greater, without occasioning any
dangerous disorder; but, when it is stopt in any of the greater
vessels, convulsions, apoplexy, or death, are the immediate and
unavoidable consequences.     If but one of those overgrown
manufactures, which, by means either of bounties or of the
monopoly of the home and colony markets, have been artificially
raised up to any unnatural height, finds some small stop or
interruption in its employment, it frequently occasions a mutiny
and disorder alarming to government, and embarrassing even to the
deliberations of the legislature. How great, therefore, would be
the disorder and confusion, it was thought, which must
necessarily be occasioned by a sudden and entire stop in the
employment of so great a proportion of our principal
manufacturers?

Some moderate and gradual relaxation of the laws which give to
Great Britain the exclusive trade to the colonies, till it is
rendered in a great measure free, seems to be the only expedient
which can, in all future times, deliver her from this danger ;
which can enable her, or even force her, to withdraw some part of
her capital from this overgrown employment, and to turn it,
though with less profit, towards other employments; and which, by
gradually diminishing one branch of her industry, and gradually
increasing all the rest, can, by degrees, restore all the
different branches of it to that natural, healthful, and proper
proportion, which perfect liberty necessarily establishes, and
which perfect liberty can alone preserve. To open the colony
trade all at once to all nations, might not only occasion some
transitory inconveniency, but a great permanent loss, to the
greater part of those whose industry or capital is at present
engaged in it. The sudden loss of the employment, even of the
ships which import the eighty-two thousand hogsheads of tobacco,
which are over and above the consumption of Great Britain, might
alone be felt very sensibly. Such are the unfortunate effects of
all the regulations of the mercantile system. They not only
introduce very dangerous disorders into the state of the body
politic, but disorders which it is often difficult to remedy,
without occasioning, for a time at least, still greater
disorders. In what manner, therefore, the colony trade ought
gradually to be opened ; what are the restraints which ought
first, and what are those which ought last, to be taken away ; or
in what manner the natural system of perfect liberty and justice
ought gradually to be restored, we must leave to the wisdom of
future statesmen and legislators to determine.

Five different events, unforeseen and unthought of, have very
fortunately concurred to hinder Great Britain from feeling, so
sensibly as it was generally expected she would, the total
exclusion which has now taken place for more than a year (from
the first of December 1774) from a very important branch of the
colony trade, that of the twelve associated provinces of North
America. First, those colonies, in preparing themselves for their
non-importation agreement, drained Great Britain completely of
all the commodities which were fit for their market ; secondly,
the extra ordinary demand of the Spanish flota has, this year,
drained Germany and the north of many commodities, linen in
particular, which used to come into competition, even in the
British market, with the manufactures of Great Britain; thirdly,
the peace between Russia and Turkey has occasioned an
extraordinary demand from the Turkey market, which, during the
distress of the country, and while a Russian fleet was cruizing
in the Archipelago, had been very poorly supplied ; fourthly, the
demand of the north of Europe for the manufactures of Great
Britain has been increasing from year to year, for some time
past; and, fifthly, the late partition, and consequential
pacification of Poland, by opening the market of that great
country, have, this year, added an extraordinary demand from
thence to the increasing demand of the north. These events are
all, except the fourth, in their nature transitory and
accidental; and the exclusion from so important a branch of the
colony trade, if unfortunately it should continue much longer,
may still occasion some degree of distress. This distress,
however, as it will come on gradually, will be felt much less
severely than if it had come on all at once ; and, in the mean
time, the industry and capital of the country may find a new
employment and direction, so as to prevent this distress from
ever rising to any considerable height.

The monopoly of the colony trade, therefore, so far as it has
turned towards that trade a greater proportion of the capital of
Great Britain than what would otherwise have gone to it, has in
all cases turned it, from a foreign trade of consumption with a
neighbouring, into one with a more distant country ; in many
cases from a direct foreign trade of consumption into a
round-about one; and, in some cases, from all foreign trade of
consumption into a carrying trade. It has, in all cases,
therefore, turned it from a direction in which it would have
maintained a greater quantity of productive labour, into one in
which it can maintain a much smaller quantity. By suiting,
besides, to one particular market only, so great a part of the
industry and commerce of Great Britain, it has rendered the whole
state of that industry and commerce more precarious and less
secure, than if their produce had been accommodated to a greater
variety of markets.

We must carefully distinguish between the effects of the colony
trade and those of the monopoly of that trade. The former are
always and necessarily beneficial ; the latter always and
necessarily hurtful. But the former are so beneficial, that the
colony trade, though subject to a monopoly, and, notwithstanding
the hurtful effects of that monopoly, is still, upon the whole,
beneficial, and greatly beneficial, though a good deal less so
than it otherwise would be.

The effect of the colony trade, in its natural and free state, is
to open a great though distant market, for such parts of the
produce of British industry as may exceed the demand of the
markets nearer home, of those of Europe, and of the countries
which lie round the Mediterranean sea. In its natural and free
state, the colony trade, without drawing from those markets any
part of the produce which had ever been sent to them, encourages
Great Britain to increase the surplus continually, by continually
presenting new equivalents to be exchanged for it. In its natural
and free state, the colony trade tends to increase the quantity
of productive labour in Great Britain, but without altering in
any respect the direction of that which had been employed there
before. In the natural and free state of the colony trade, the
competition of all other nations would hinder the rate of profit
from rising above the common level, either in the new market, or
in the new employment. The new market, without drawing any thing
from the old one, would create, if one may say so, a new produce
for its own supply ; and that new produce would constitute a new
capital for carrying on the new employment, which, in the same
manner, would draw nothing from the old one.

The monopoly of the colony trade, on the contrary, by excluding
the competition of other nations, and thereby raising the rate of
profit, both in the new market and in the new employment, draws
produce from the old market, and capital from the old employment.
To augment our share of the colony trade beyond what it otherwise
would be, is the avowed purpose of the monopoly. If our share of
that trade were to be no greater with, than it would have been
without the monopoly, there could have been no reason for
establishing the monopoly. But whatever forces into a branch of
trade, of which the returns are slower and more distant than
those of the greater part of other trades, a greater proportion
of the capital of any country, than what of its own accord would
go to that branch, necessarily renders the whole quantity of
productive labour annually maintained there, the whole annual
produce of the land and labour of that country, less than they
otherwise would be. It keeps down the revenue of the inhabitants
of that country below what it would naturally rise to, and
thereby diminishes their power of accumulation. It not only
hinders, at all times, their capital from maintaining so great a
quantity of productive labour as it would otherwise maintain, but
it hinders it from increasing so fast as it would otherwise
increase, and, consequently, from maintaining a still greater
quantity of productive labour.

The natural good effects of the colony trade, however, more than
counterbalance to Great Britain the bad effects of the monopoly ;
so that, monopoly and altogether, that trade, even as it is
carried on at present, is not only advantageous, but greatly
advantageous. The new market and the new employment which are
opened by the colony trade, are of much greater extent than that
portion of the old market and of the old employment which is lost
by the monopoly. The new produce and the new capital which has
been created, if one may say so, by the colony trade, maintain in
Great Britain a greater quantity of productive labour than what
can have been thrown out of employment by the revulsion of
capital from other trades of which the returns are more frequent.
If the colony trade, however, even as it is carried on at
present, is advantageous to Great Britain, it is not by means of
the monopoly, but in spite of the monopoly.

It is rather for the manufactured than for the rude produce of
Europe, that the colony trade opens a new market. Agriculture is
the proper business of all new colonies; a business which the
cheapness of land renders more advantageous than any other. They
abound, therefore, in the rude produce of land ; and instead of
importing it from other countries, they have generally a large
surplus to export.     In new colonies, agriculture either draws
hands from all other employments, or keeps them from going to any
other employment. There are few hands to spare for the necessary,
and none for the ornamental manufactures. The greater part of the
manufactures of both kinds they find it cheaper to purchase of
other countries than to make for themselves. It is chiefly by
encouraging the manufactures of Europe, that the colony trade
indirectly encourages its agriculture. The manufacturers of
Europe, to whom that trade gives employment, constitute a new
market for the produce of the land, and the most advantageous of
all markets ; the home market for the corn and cattle, for the
bread and butcher's meat of Europe, is thus greatly extended by
means of the trade to America.

But that the monopoly of the trade of populous and thriving
colonies is not alone sufficient to establish, or even to
maintain, manufactures in any country, the examples of Spain and
Portugal sufficiently demonstrate. Spain and Portugal were
manufacturing countries before they had any considerable
colonies.     Since they had the richest and most fertile in the
world, they have both ceased to be so.

In Spain and Portugal, the bad effects of the monopoly,
aggravated by other causes, have, perhaps, nearly overbalanced
the natural good effects of the colony trade. These causes seem
to be other monopolies of different kinds: the degradation of the
value of gold and silver below what it is in most other countries
; the exclusion from foreign markets by improper taxes upon
exportation, and the narrowing of the home market, by still more
improper taxes upon the transportation of goods from one part of
the country to another ; but above all, that irregular and
partial administration of justice which often protects the rich
and powerful debtor from the pursuit of his injured creditor, and
which makes the industrious part of the nation afraid to prepare
goods for the consumption of those haughty and great men, to whom
they dare not refuse to sell upon credit, and from whom they are
altogether uncertain of repayment.

In England, on the contrary, the natural good effects of the
colony trade, assisted by other causes, have in a great measure
conquered the bad effects of the monopoly. These causes seem to
be, the general liberty of trade, which, notwithstanding some
restraints, is at least equal, perhaps superior, to what it is in
any other country ; the liberty of exporting, duty free, almost
all sorts of goods which are the produce of domestic industry, to
almost any foreign country; and what, perhaps, is of still
greater importance, the unbounded liberty of transporting them
from one part of our own country to any other, without being
obliged to give any account to any public office, without being
liable to question or examination of any kind; but, above all,
that equal and impartial administration of justice, which renders
the rights of the meanest British subject respectable to the
greatest, and which, by securing to every man the fruits of his
own industry, gives the greatest and most effectual encouragement
to every sort of industry.

If the manufactures of Great Britain, however, have been
advanced, as they certainly have, by the colony trade, it has not
been by means of the monopoly of that trade, but in spite of the
monopoly.     The effect of the monopoly has been, not to augment
the quantity, but to alter the quality and shape of a part of the
manufactures of Great Britain, and to accommodate to a market,
from which the returns are slow and distant, what would otherwise
have been accommodated to one from which the returns are frequent
and near. Its effect has consequently been, to turn a part of the
capital of Great Britain from an employment in which it would
have maintained a greater quantity of manufacturing industry, to
one in which it maintains a much smaller, and thereby to
diminish, instead of increasing, the whole quantity of
manufacturing industry maintained in Great Britain.

The monopoly of the colony trade, therefore, like all the other
mean and malignant expedients of the mercantile system, depresses
the industry of all other countries, but chiefly that of the
colonies, without in the least increasing, but on the contrary
diminishing, that of the country in whose favour it is
established.

The monopoly hinders the capital of that country, whatever may,
at any particular time, be the extent of that capital, from
maintaining so great a quantity of productive labour as it would
otherwise maintain, and from affording so great a revenue to the
industrious inhabitants as it would otherwise afford. But as
capital can be increased only by savings from revenue, the
monopoly, by hindering it from affording so great a revenue as it
would otherwise afford, necessarily hinders it from increasing so
fast as it would otherwise increase, and consequently from
maintaining a still greater quantity of productive labour, and
affording a still greater revenue to the industrious inhabitants
of that country. One great original source of revenue, therefore,
the wages of labour, the monopoly must necessarily have rendered,
at all times, less abundant than it otherwise would have been.

By raising the rate of mercantile profit, the monopoly
discourages the improvement of land. The profit of improvement
depends upon the difference between what the land actually
produces, and what, by the application of a certain capital, it
can be made to produce. If this difference affords a greater
profit than what can be drawn from an equal capital in any
mercantile employment, the improvement of land will draw capital
from all mercantile employments. If the profit is less,
mercantile employments will draw capital from the improvement of
land. Whatever, therefore, raises the rate of mercantile profit,
either lessens the superiority, or increases the inferiority of
the profit of improvement : and, in the one case, hinders capital
from going to improvement, and in the other draws capital from
it; but by discouraging improvement, the monopoly necessarily
retards the natural increase of another great original source of
revenue, the rent of land.     By raising the rate of profit,
too, the monopoly necessarily keeps up the market rate of
interest higher than it otherwise would be. But the price of
land, in proportion to the rent which it affords, the number of
years purchase which is commonly paid for it, necessarily falls
as the rate of interest rises, and rises as the rate of interest
falls.     The monopoly, therefore, hurts the interest of the
landlord two different ways, by retarding the natural increase,
first, of his rent, and, secondly, of the price which he would
get for his land, in proportion to the rent which it affords.

The monopoly, indeed, raises the rate of mercantile profit and
thereby augments somewhat the gain of our merchants. But as it
obstructs the natural increase of capital, it tends rather to
diminish than to increase the sum total of the revenue which the
inhabitants of the country derive from the profits of stock ; a
small profit upon a great capital generally affording a greater
revenue than a great profit upon a small one. The monopoly raises
the rate of profit, but it hinders the sum of profit from rising
so high as it otherwise would do.

All the original sources of revenue, the wages of labour, the
rent of land, and the profits of stock, the monopoly renders much
less abundant than they otherwise would be. To promote the little
interest of one little order of men in one country, it hurts the
interest of all other orders of men in that country, and of all
the men in all other countries.

It is solely by raising the ordinary rate of profit, that the
monopoly either has proved, or could prove, advantageous to any
one particular order of men.     But besides all the bad effects
to the country in general, which have already been mentioned as
necessarily resulting from a higher rate of profit, there is one
more fatal, perhaps, than all these put together, but which, if
we may judge from experience, is inseparably connected with it.
The high rate of profit seems everywhere to destroy that
parsimony which, in other circumstances, is natural to the
character of the merchant. When profits are high, that sober
virtue seems to be superfluous, and expensive luxury to suit
better the affluence of his situation.  But the owners of the
great mercantile capitals are necessarily the leaders and
conductors of the whole industry of every nation; and their
example has a much greater influence upon the manners of the
whole industrious part of it than that of any other order of men.
If his employer is attentive and parsimonious, the workman is
very likely to be so too; but if the master is dissolute and
disorderly, the servant, who shapes his work according to the
pattern which his master prescribes to him, will shape his life,
too, according to the example which he sets him. Accumulation is
thus prevented in the hands of all those who are naturally the
most disposed to accumulate; and the funds destined for the
maintenance of productive labour, receive no augmentation from
the revenue of those who ought naturally to augment them the
most.     The capital of the country, instead of increasing,
gradually dwindles away, and the quantity of productive labour
maintained in it grows every day less and less. Have the
exorbitant profits of the merchants of Cadiz and Lisbon augmented
the capital of Spain and Portugal ? Have they alleviated the
poverty, have they promoted the industry, of those two beggarly
countries? Such has been the tone of mercantile expense in those
two trading cities, that those exorbitant profits, far from
augmenting the general capital of the country, seem scarce to
have been sufficient to keep up the capitals upon which they were
made. Foreign capitals are every day intruding themselves, if I
may say so, more and more into the trade of Cadiz and Lisbon. It
is to expel those foreign capitals from a trade which their own
grows every day more and more insufficient for carrying on, that
the Spaniards and Portuguese endeavour every day to straiten more
and more the galling bands of their absurd monopoly. Compare the
mercantile manners of Cadiz and Lisbon with those of Amsterdam,
and you will be sensible how differently the conduct and
character of merchants are affected by the high and by the low
profits of stock. The merchants of London, indeed, have not yet
generally become such magnificent lords as those of Cadiz and
Lisbon; but neither are they in general such attetitive and
parsimonious burghers as those of Amsterdam. They are supposed,
however, many of them, to be a good deal richer than the greater
part of the former, and not quire so rich as many of the latter:
but the rate of their profit is commonly much lower than that of
the former, and a good deal higher than that of the latter. Light
come, light go, says the proverb ; and the ordinary tone of
expense seems everywhere to be regulated, not so much according
to the real ability of spending, as to the supposed facility of
getting money to spend.

It is thus that the single advantage which the monopoly procures
to a single order of men, is in many different ways hurtful to
the general interest of the country.

To found a great empire for the sole purpose of raising up a
people of customers, may at first sight, appear a project fit
only for a nation of shopkeepers. It is, however, a project
altogether unfit for a nation of shopkeepers, but extremely fit
for a nation whose government is influenced by shopkeepers. Such
statesmen, and such statesmen only, are capable of fancying that
they will find some advantage in employing the blood and treasure
of their fellow-citizens, to found and maintain such an empire.
Say to a shopkeeper, Buy me a good estate, and I shall always buy
my clothes at your shop, even though I should pay somewhat dearer
than what I can have them for at other shops ; and you will not
find him very forward to embrace your proposal.      But should
any other person buy you such an estate, the shopkeeper will be
much obliged to your benefactor if he would enjoin you to buy all
your clothes at his shop. England purchased for some of her
subjects, who found themselves uneasy at home, a great estate in
a distant country. The price, indeed, was very small, and instead
of thirty years purchase, the ordinary price of land in the
present times, it amounted to little more than the expense of the
different equipments which made the first discovery, reconoitered
the coast, and took a fictitious possession of the country. The
land was good, and of great extent; and the cultivators having
plenty of good ground to work upon, and being for some time at
liberty to sell their produce where they pleased, became, in the
course of little more than thirty or forty years (between 1620
and 1660), so numerous and thriving a people, that the
shopkeepers and other traders of England wished to secure to
themselves the monopoly of their custom.     Without pretending,
therefore, that they had paid any part, either of the original
purchase money, or of the subsequent expense of improvement, they
petitioned the parliament, that the cultivators of America might
for the future be confined to their shop; first, for buying all
the goods which they wanted from Europe; and, secondly, for
selling all such parts of their own produce as those traders
might find it convenient to buy. For they did not find it
convenient to buy every part of it. Some parts of it imported
into England, might have interfered with some of the trades which
they themselves carried on at home. Those particular parts of it,
therefore, they were willing that the colonists should sell where
they could; the farther off the better; and upon that account
proposed that their market should be confined to the countries
south of Cape Finisterre. A clause in the famous act of
navigation established this truly shopkeeper proposal into a law.

The maintenance of this monopoly has hitherto been the principal,
or more properly, perhaps, the sole end and purpose of the
dominion which Great Britain assumes over her colonies. In the
exclusive trade, it is supposed, consists the great advantage of
provinces, which have never yet afforded either revenue or
military force for the support of the civil government, or the
defence of the mother country. The monopoly is the principal
badge of their dependency, and it is the sole fruit which has
hitherto been gathered from that dependency. Whatever expense
Great Britain has hitherto laid out in maintaining this
dependency, has really been laid out in order to support this
monopoly. The expense of the ordinary peace establishment of the
colonies amounted, before the commencement of the present
disturbances to the pay of twenty regiments of foot ; to the
expense of the artillery, stores, and extraordinary provisions,
with which it was necessary to supply them ; and to the expense
of a very considerable naval force, which was constantly kept up,
in order to guard from the smuggling vessels of other nations,
the immense coast of North America, and that of our West Indian
islands. The whole expense of this peace establishment was a
charge upon the revenue of Great Britain, and was, at the same
time, the smallest part of what the dominion of the colonies has
cost the mother country. If we would know the amount of the
whole, we must add to the annual expense of this peace
establishment, the interest of the sums which, in consequence of
their considering her colonies as provinces subject to her
dominion, Great Britain has, upon different occasions, laid out
upon their defence. We must add to it, in particular, the whole
expense of the late war, and a great part of that of the war
which preceded it. The late war was altogether a colony quarrel ;
and the whole expense of it, in whatever part of the world it
might have been laid out, whether in Germany or the East Indies,
ought justly to be stated to the account of the colonies.     It
amounted to more than ninety millions sterling, including not
only the new debt which was contracted, but the two shillings in
the pound additional land tax, and the sums which were every year
borrowed from the sinking fund. The Spanish war which began in
1739 was principally a colony quarrel. Its principal object was
to prevent the search of the colony ships, which carried on a
contraband trade with the Spanish Main. This whole expense is, in
reality, a bounty which has been given in order to support a
monopoly. The pretended purpose of it was to encourage the
manufactures, and to increase the commerce of Great Britain. But
its real effect has been to raise the rate of mercantile profit,
and to enable our merchants to turn into a branch of trade, of
which the returns are more slow and distant than those of the
greater part of other trades, a greater proportion of their
capital than they otherwise would have done; two events which, if
a bounty could have prevented, it might perhaps have been very
well worth while to give such a bounty.

Under the present system of management, therefore, Great Britain
derives nothing but loss from the dominion which she assumes over
her colonies.

To propose that Great Britain should voluntarily give up all
authority over her colonies, and leave them to elect their own
magistrates, to enact their own laws, and to make peace and war,
as they might think proper, would be to propose such a measure as
never was, and never will be, adopted by any nation in the world.
No nation ever voluntarily gave up the dominion of any province,
how troublesome soever it might be to govern it, and how small
soever the revenue which it afforded might be in proportion to
the expense which it occasioned. Such sacrifices, though they
might frequently be agreeable to the interest, are always
mortifying to the pride of every nation; and, what is perhaps of
still greater consequence, they are always contrary to the
private interest of the governing part of it, who would thereby
be deprived of the disposal of many places of trust and profit,
of many opportunities of acquiring wealth and distinction, which
the possession of the most turbulent, and, to the great body of
the people, the most unprofitable province, seldom fails to
afford. The most visionary enthusiasts would scarce be capable of
proposing such a measure, with any serious hopes at least of its
ever being adopted. If it was adopted, however, Great Britain
would not only be immediately freed from the whole annual expense
of the peace establishment of the colonies, but might settle with
them such a treaty of commerce as would effectually secure to her
a free trade, more advantageous to the great body of the people,
though less so to the merchants, than the monopoly which she at
present enjoys. By thus parting good friends, the natural
affection of the colonies to the mother country, which, perhaps,
our late dissensions have well nigh extinguished, would quickly
revive. It might dispose them not only to respect, for whole
centuries together, that treaty of commerce which they had
concluded with us at parting, but to favour us in war as well as
in trade, and instead of turbulent and factious subjects, to
become our most faithful, affectionate, and generous allies; and
the same sort of parental affection on the one side, and filial
respect on the other, might revive between Great Britain and her
colonies, which used to subsist between those of ancient Greece
and the mother city from which they descended.

In order to render any province advantageous to the empire to
which it belongs, it ought to afford, in time of peace, a revenue
to the public, sufficient not only for defraying the whole
expense of its own peace establishment, but for contributing its
proportion to the support of the general government of the
empire. Every province necessarily contributes, more or less, to
increase the expense of that general government. If any
particular province, therefore, does not contribute its share
towards defraying this expense, an unequal burden must be thrown
upon some other part of the empire. The extraordinary revenue,
too, which every province affords to the public in time of war,
ought, from parity of reason, to bear the same proportion to the
extraordinary revenue of the whole empire, which its ordinary
revenue does in time of peace. That neither the ordinary nor
extraordinary revenue which Great Britain derives from her
colonies, bears this proportion to the whole revenue of the
British empire, will readily be allowed. The monopoly, it has
been supposed, indeed, by increasing the private revenue of the
people of Great Britain, and thereby enabling them to pay greater
taxes, compensates the deficiency of the public revenue of the
colonies. But this monopoly, I have endeavoured to show, though a
very grievous tax upon the colonies, and though it may increase
the revenue of a particular order of men in Great Britain,
diminishes, instead of increasing, that of the great body of the
people, and consequently diminishes, instead of increasing, the
ability of the great body of the people to pay taxes. The men,
too, whose revenue the monopoly increases, constitute a
particular order, which it is both absolutely impossible to tax
beyond the proportion of other orders, and extremely impolitic
even to attempt to tax beyond that proportion, as I shall
endeavour to show in the following book. No particular resource,
therefore, can be drawn from this particular order.

The colonies may be taxed either by their own assemblies, or by
the parliament of Great Britain.

That the colony assemblies can never be so managed as to levy
upon their constituents a public revenue, sufficient, not only to
maintain at all times their own civil and military establishment,
but to pay their proper proportion of the expense of the general
government of the British empire, seems not very probable. It was
a long time before even the parliament of England, though placed
immediately under the eye of the sovereign, could be brought
under such a system of management, or could be rendered
sufficiently liberal in their grants for supporting the civil and
military establishments even of their own country. It was only by
distributing among the particular members of parliament a great
part either of the offices, or of the disposal of the offices
arising from this civil and military establishment, that such a
system of management could be established, even with regard to
the parliament of England. But the distance of the colony
assemblies from the eye of the sovereign, their number, their
dispersed situation, and their various constitutions, would
render it very difficult to manage them in the same manner, even
though the sovereign had the same means of doing it; and those
means are wanting. It would be absolutely impossible to
distribute among all the leading members of all the colony
assemblies such a share, either of the offices, or of the
disposal of the offices, arising from the general government of
the British empire, as to dispose them to give up their
popularity at home, and to tax their constituents for the support
of that general government, of which almost the whole emoluments
were to be divided among people who were strangers to them. The
unavoidable ignorance of administration, besides, concerning the
relative importance of the different members of those different
assemblies, the offences which must frequently be given, the
blunders which must constantly be committed, in attempting to
manage them in this manner, seems to render such a system of
management altogether impracticable with regard to them.

The colony assemblies, besides, cannot be supposed the proper
judges of what is necessary for the defence and support of the
whole empire. The care of that defence and support is not
entrusted to them. It is not their business, and they have no
regular means of information concerning it. The assembly of a
province, like the vestry of a parish, may judge very properly
concerning the affairs of its own particular district, but can
have no proper means of judging concerning those of the whole
empire. It cannot even judge properly concerning the proportion
which its own province bears to the whole empire, or concerning
the relative degree of its wealth and importance, compared with
the other provinces; because those other provinces are not under
the inspection and superintendency of the assembly of a
particular province. What is necessary for the defence and
support of the whole empire, and in what proportion each part
ought to contribute, can be judged of only by that assembly which
inspects and super-intends the affairs of the whole empire.

It has been proposed, accordingly, that the colonies should be
taxed by requisition, the parliament of Great Britain determining
the sum which each colony ought to pay, and the provincial
assembly assessing and levying it in the way that suited best the
circumstances of the province. What concerned the whole empire
would in this way be determined by the assembly which inspects
and superintends the affairs of the whole empire ; and the
provincial affairs of each colony might still be regulated by its
own assembly. Though the colonies should, in this case, have no
representatives in the British parliament, yet, if we may judge
by experience, there is no probability that the parliamentary
requisition would be unreasonable. The parliament of England has
not, upon any occasion, shewn the smallest disposition to
overburden those parts of the empire which are not represented in
parliament. The islands of Guernsey and Jersey, without any means
of resisting the authority of parliament, are more lightly taxed
than any part of Great Britain. Parliament, in attempting to
exercise its supposed right, whether well or ill grounded, of
taxing the colonies, has never hitherto demanded of them anything
which even approached to a just proportion to what was paid by
their fellow subjects at home. If the contribution of the
colonies, besides, was to rise or fall in proportion to the rise
or fall of the land-tax, parliament could not tax them without
taxing, at the same time, its own constituents, and the colonies
might, in this case, be considered as virtually represented in
parliament.

Examples are not wanting of empires in which all the different
provinces are not taxed, if I may be allowed the expression, in
one mass ; but in which the sovereign regulates the sum which
each province ought to pay, and in some provinces assesses and
levies it as he thinks proper ; while in others he leaves it to
be assessed and levied as the respective states of each province
shall determine. In some provinces of France, the king not only
imposes what taxes he thinks proper, but assesses and levies them
in the way he thinks proper. From others he demands a certain
sum, but leaves it to the states of each province to assess and
levy that sum as they think proper. According to the scheme of
taxing by requisition, the parliament of Great Britain would
stand nearly in the same situation towards the colony assemblies,
as the king of France does towards the states of those provinces
which still enjoy the privilege of having states of their own,
the provinces of France which are supposed to be the best
governed.

But though, according to this scheme, the colonies could have no
just reason to fear that their share of the public burdens should
ever exceed the proper proportion to that of their
fellow-citizens at home, Great Britain might have just reason to
fear that it never would amount to that proper proportion. The
parliament of Great Britain has not, for some time past, had the
same established authority in the colonies, which the French king
has in those provinces of France which still enjoy the privilege
of having states of their own. The colony assemblies, if they
were not very favourably disposed (and unless more skilfully
managed than they ever have been hitherto, they are not very
likely to be so), might still find many pretences for evading or
rejecting the most reasonable requisitions of parliament. A
French war breaks out, we shall suppose; ten millions must
immediately be raised, in order to defend the seat of the empire.
This sum must be borrowed upon the credit of some parliamentary
fund mortgaged for paying the interest. Part of this fund
parliament proposes to raise by a tax to be levied in Great
Britain ; and part of it by a requisition to all the different
colony assemblies of America and the West Indies. Would people
readily advance their money upon the credit of a fund which
partly depended upon the good humour of all those assemblies, far
distant from the seat of the war, and sometimes, perhaps,
thinking themselves not much concerned in the event of it ? Upon
such a fund, no more money would probably be advanced than what
the tax to be levied in Great Britain might be supposed to answer
for. The whole burden of the debt contracted on account of the
war would in this manner fall, as it always has done hitherto,
upon Great Britain; upon a part of the empire, and not upon the
whole empire. Great Britain is, perhaps, since the world began,
the only state which, as it has extended its empire, has only
increased its expense, without once augmenting its resources.
Other states have generally disburdened themselves, upon their
subject and subordinate provinces, of the most considerable part
of the expense of defending the empire. Great Britain has
hitherto suffered her subject and subordinate provinces to
disburden themselves upon her of almost this whole expense. In
order to put Great Britain upon a footing of equality with her
own colonies, which the law has hitherto supposed to be subject
and subordinate, it seems necessary, upon the scheme of taxing
them by parliamentary requisition, that parliament should have
some means of rendering its requisitions immediately effectual,
in case the colony assemblies should attempt to evade or reject
them; and what those means are, it is not very easy to conceive,
and it has not yet been explained.

Should the parliament of Great Britain, at the same time, be ever
fully established in the right of taxing the colonies, even
independent of the consent of their own assemblies, the
importance of those assemblies would, from that moment, be at an
end, and with it, that of all the leading men of British America.
Men desire to have some share in the management of public
affairs, chiefly on account of the importance which it gives
them. Upon the power which the greater part of the leading men,
the natural aristocracy of every country, have of preserving or
defending their respective importance, depends the stability and
duration of every system of free government. In the attacks which
those leading men are continually making upon the importance of
one another, and in the defence of their own, consists the whole
play of domestic faction and ambition. The leading men of
America, like those of all other countries, desire to preserve
their own importance. They feel, or imagine, that if their
assemblies, which they are fond of calling parliaments, and of
considering as equal in authority to the parliament of Great
Britain, should be so far degraded as to become the humble
ministers and executive officers of that parliament, the greater
part of their own importance would be at an end. They have
rejected, therefore, the proposal of being taxed by parliamentary
requisition, and, like other ambitious and high-spirited men,
have rather chosen to draw the sword in defence of their own
importance.

Towards the declension of the Roman republic, the allies of Rome,
who had borne the principal burden of defending the state and
extending the empire, demanded to be admitted to all the
privileges of Roman citizens. Upon being refused, the social war
broke out. During the course of that war, Rome granted those
privileges to the greater part of them, one by one, and in
proportion as they detached themselves from the general
confederacy. The parliament of Great Britain insists upon taxing
the colonies ; and they refuse to be taxed by a parliament in
which they are not represented. If to each colony which should
detach itself from the general confederacy, Great Britain should
allow such a number of representatives as suited the proportion
of what it contributed to the public revenue of the empire, in
consequence of its being subjected to the same taxes. and in
compensation admitted to the same freedom of trade with its
fellow-subjects at home; the number of its representatives to be
augmented as the proportion of its contribution might afterwards
augment ; a new method of acquiring importance, a new and more
dazzling object of ambition, would be presented to the leading
men of each colony. Instead of piddling for the little prizes
which are to be found in what may be called the paltry raffle of
colony faction, they might then hope, from the presumption which
men naturally have in their own ability and good fortune, to draw
some of the great prizes which sometimes come from the wheel of
the great state lottery of British politics. Unless this or some
other method is fallen upon, and there seems to be none more
ubvious than this, of preserving the importance and of gratifying
the ambition of the leading men of America, it is not very
probable that they will ever voluntarily submit to us; and we
ought to consider, that the blood which must be shed in forcing
them to do so, is, every drop of it, the blood either of those
who are, or of those whom we wish to have for our fellow
citizens. They are very weak who flatter themselves that, in the
state to which things have come, our colonies will be easily
conquered by force alone. The persons who now govern the
resolutions of what they call their continental congress, feel in
themselves at this moment a degree of importance which, perhaps,
the greatest subjects in Europe scarce feel. From shopkeepers,
trades men, and attorneys, they are become statesmen and
legislators, and are employed in contriving a new form of
government for an extensive empire, which, they flatter
themselves, will become, and which, indeed, seems very likely to
become, one of the greatest and most formidable that ever was in
the world. Five hundred different people, perhaps, who, in
different ways, act immediately under the continental congress,
and five hundred thousand, perhaps, who act under those five
hundred, all feel, in the same manner, a proportionable rise in
their own importance. Almost every individual of the governing
party in America fills, at present, in his own fancy, a station
superior, not only to what he had ever filled before, but to what
he had ever expected to fill; and unless some new object of
ambition is presented either to him or to his leaders, if he has
the ordinary spirit of a man, he will die in defence of that
station.

It is a remark of the President Heynaut, that we now read with
pleasure the account of many little transactions of the Ligue,
which, when they happened, were not, perhaps, considered as very
important pieces of news. But everyman then, says he, fancied
himself of some importance ; and the innumerable memoirs which
have come down to us from those times, were the greater part of
them written by people who took pleasure in recording and
magnifying events, in which they flattered themselves they had
been considerable actors. How obstinately the city of Paris, upon
that occasion, defended itself, what a dreadful famine it
supported, rather than submit to the best, and afterwards the
most beloved of all the French kings, is well known. The greater
part of the citizens, or those who governed the greater part of
them, fought in defence of their own importance, which, they
foresaw, was to be at an end whenever the ancient government
should be re-established. Our colonies, unless they can be
induced to consent to a union, are very likely to defend
themselves, against the best of all mother countries, as
obstinately as the city of Paris did against one of the best of
kings.

The idea of representation was unknown in ancient times. When the
people of one state were admitted to the right of citizenship in
another, they had no other means of exercising that right, but by
coming in a body to vote and deliberate with the people of that
other state. The admission of the greater part of the inhabitants
of Italy to the privileges of Roman citizens, completely ruined
the Roman republic. It was no longer possible to distinguish
between who was, and who was not, a Roman citizen. No tribe could
know its own members. A rabble of any kind could be introduced
into the assemblies of the people, could drive out the real
citizens, and decide upon the affairs of the republic, as if they
themselves had been such. But though America were to send fifty
or sixty new representatives to parlimnent, the door-keeper of
the house of commons could not find any great difficulty in
distinguishing between who was and who was not a member. Though
the Roman constitution, therefore, was necessarily ruined by the
union of Rome with the allied states of Italy, there is not the
least probability that the British constitution would be hurt by
the union of Great Britain with her colonies.     That
constitution, on the contrary, would be completed by it, and
seems to be imperfect without it. The assembly which deliberates
and decides concerning the affairs of every part of the empire,
in order to be properly informed, ought certainly to have
representatives from every part of it. That this union, however,
could be easily effectuated, or that difficulties, and great
difficulties, might not occur in the execution, I do not pretend.
I have yet heard of none, however, which appear insurmountable.
The principal, perhaps, arise, not from the nature of things, but
from the prejudices and opinions of the people, both on this and
on the other side of the Atlantic.

We on this side the water are afraid lest the multitude of
American representatives should overturn the balance of the
constitution, and increase too much either the influence of the
crown on the one hand, or the force of the democracy on the
other. But if the number of American representatives were to be
in proportion to the produce of American taxation, the number of
people to be managed would increase exactly in proportion to the
means of managing them, and the means of managing to the number
of people to be managed. The monarchical and democratical parts
of the constitution would, after the union, stand exactly in the
same degree of relative force with regard to one another as they
had done before.

The people on the other side of the water are afraid lest their
distance from the seat of government might expose them to many
oppressions ; but their representatives in parliament, of which
the number ought from the first to be considerable, would easily
be able to protect them from all oppression. The distance could
not much weaken the dependency of the representative upon the
constituent, and the former would still feel that he owed his
seat in parliament, and all the consequence which he derived from
it, to the good-will of the latter. It would be the interest of
the former, therefore, to cultivate that good-will, by
complaining, with all the authority of a member of the
legislature, of every outrage which any civil or military officer
might be guilty of in those remote parts of the empire. The
distance of America from the seat of government, besides, the
natives of that country might flatter themselves, with some
appearance of reason too, would not be of very long continuance.
Such has hitherto been the rapid progress of that country in
wealth, population, and improvement, that in the course of little
more than a century, perhaps, the produce of the American might
exceed that of the British taxation. The seat of the empire would
then naturally remove itself to that part of the empire which
contributed most to the general defence and support of the whole.

The discovery of America, and that of a passage to the East
Indies by the Cape of Good Hope, are the two greatest and most
important events recorded in the history of mankind. Their
consequences have already been great; but, in the short period of
between two and three centuries which has elapsed since these
discoveries were made, it is impossible that the whole extent of
their consequences can have been seen. What benefits or what
misfortunes to mankind may hereafter result from those great
events, no human wisdom can foresee. By uniting in some measure
the most distant parts of the world, by enabling them to relieve
one another's wants, to increase one another's enjoyments, and to
encourage one another's industry, their general tendency would
seem to be beneficial. To the natives, however, both of the East
and West Indies, all the commercial benefits which can have
resulted from those events have been sunk and lost in the
dreadful misfortunes which they have occasioned. These
misfortunes, however, seem to have arisen rather from accident
than from any thing in the nature of those events themselves. At
the particular time when these discoveries were made, the
superiority of force happened to be so great on the side of the
Europeans, that they were enabled to commit with impunity every
sort of injustice in those remote countries. Hereafter, perhaps,
the natives of those countries may grow stronger, or those of
Europe may grow weaker ; and the inhabitants of all the different
quarters of the world may arrive at that equality of courage and
force which, by inspiring mutual fear, can alone overawe the
injustice of independent nations into some sort of respect for
the rights of one another. But nothing seems more likely to
establish this equality of force, than that mutual communication
of knowledge, and of all sorts of improvements, which an
extensive commerce from all countries to all countries naturally,
or rather necessarily, carries along with it.

In the mean time, one of the principal effects of those
discoveries has been, to raise the mercantile system to a degree
of splendour and glory which it could never otherwise have
attained to. It is the object of that system to enrich a great
nation, rather by trade and manufactures than by the improvement
and cultivation of land, rather by the industry of the towns than
by that of the country. But in consequence of those discoveries,
the commercial towns of Europe, instead of being the
manufacturers and carriers for but a very small part of the world
(that part of Europe which is washed by the Atlantic ocean, and
the countries which lie round the Baltic and Mediterranean seas),
have now become the manufacturers for the numerous and thriving
cultivators of America, and the carriers, and in some respects
the manufacturers too, for almost all the different nations of
Asia, Africa, and America. Two new worlds have been opened to
their industry, each of them much greater and more extensive than
the old one, and the market of one of them growing still greater
and greater every day.

The countries which possess the colonies of America, and which
trade directly to the East Indies, enjoy indeed the whole show
and splendour of this great commerce. Other countries, however,
notwithstanding all the invidious restraints by which it is meant
to exclude them, frequently enjoy a greater share of the real
benefit of it. The colonies of Spain and. Portugal, for example,
give more real encouragement to the industry of other countries
than to that of Spain and Portugal. In the single article of
linen alone, the consumption of those colonies amounts, it is
said (but I do not pretend to warrant the quantity ), to more
than three millions sterling a-year. But this great consumption
is almost entirely supplied by France, Flanders, Holland, and
Germany. Spain and Portugal furnish but a small part of it. The
capital which supplies the colonies with this great quantity of
linen, is annually distributed among, and furnishes a revenue to,
the inhabitants of those other countries. The profits of it only
are spent in Spain and Portugal, where they help to support the
sumptuous profusion of the merchants of Cadiz and Lisbon.

Even the regulations by which each nation endeavours to secure to
itself the exclusive trade of its own colonies, are frequently
more hurtful to the countries in favour of which they are
established, than to those against which they are established.
The unjust oppression of the industry of other countries falls
back, if I may say so, upon the heads of the oppressors, and
crushes their industry more than it does that of those other
countries. By those regulations, for example, the merchant of
Hamburg must send the linen which he destines for the American
market to London, and he must bring back from thence the tobacco
which be destines for the German market; because he can neither
send the one directly to America, nor bring the other directly
from thence. By this restraint he is probably obliged to sell the
one somewhat cheaper, and to buy the other somewhat dearer, than
he otherwise might have done; and his profits are probably
somewhat abridged by means of it. In this trade, however, between
Hamburg and London, he certainly receives the returns of his
capital much more quickly than he could possibly have done in the
direct trade to America, even though we should suppose, what is
by no means the case, that the payments of America were as
punctual as those of London.     In the trade, therefore, to
which those regulations confine the merchant of Hamburg, his
capital can keep in constant employment a much greater quantity
of German industry than he possibly could have done in the trade
from which he is excluded. Though the one employment, therefore,
may to him perhaps be less profitable than the other, it cannot
be less advantageous to his country. It is quite otherwise with
the employment into which the monpoly naturally attracts, if I
may say so, the capital of the London merchant. That employment
may, perhaps, be more profitable to him than the greater part of
other employments; but on account of the slowness of the returns,
it cannot be more advantageous to his country.

After all the unjust attempts, therefore, of every country in
Europe to engross to itself the whole advantage of the trade of
its own colonies, no country has yet been able to engross to
itself any thing but the expense of supporting in time of peace,
and of defending in time of war, the oppressive authority which
it assumes over them. The inconveniencies resulting from the
possession of its colonies, every country has engrossed to itself
completely.      The advantages resulting from their trade, it
has been obliged to share with many other countries.

At first sight, no doubt, the monopoly of the great commerce of
America naturally seems to be an acquisition of the highest
value. To the undiscerning eye of giddy ambition it naturally
presents itself, amidst the confused scramble of politics and
war, as a very dazzling object to fight for. The dazzling
splendour of the object, however, the immense greatness of the
commerce, is the very quality which renders the monopoly of it
hurtful, or which makes one employment, in its own nature
necessarily less advantageous to the country than the greater
part of other employments, absorb a much greater proportion of
the capital of the country than what would otherwise have gone to
it.

The mercantile stock of every country, it has been shown in the
second book, naturally seeks, if one may say so, the employment
most advantageous to that country. If it is employed in the
carrying trade, the country to which it belongs becomes the
emporium of the goods of all the countries whose trade that stock
carries on. But the owner of that stock necessarily wishes to
dispose of as great a part of those goods as he can at home. He
thereby saves himself the trouble, risk, and expense of
exportation ; and he will upon that account be glad to sell them
at home, not only for a much smaller price, but with somewhat a
smaller profit, than he might expect to make by sending them
abroad. He naturally, therefore, endeavours as much as he can to
turn his carrying trade into a foreign trade of consumption, If
his stock, again, is employed in a foreign trade of consumption,
he will, for the same reason, be glad to dispose of, at home, as
great a part as he can of the home goods which he collects in
order to export to some foreign market, and he will thus
endeavour, as much as he can, to turn his foreign trade of
consumption into a home trade. The mercantile stock of every
country naturally courts in this manner the near, and shuns the
distant employment : naturally courts the employment in which the
returns are frequent, and shuns that in which they are distant
and slow; naturally courts the employment in which it can
maintain the greatest quantity of productive labour in the
country to which it belongs, or in which its owner resides, and
shuns that in which it can maintain there the smallest quantity.
It naturally courts the employment which in ordinary cases is
most advantageous, and shuns that which in ordinary cases is
least advantageous to that country.

But if, in any one of those distant employments, which in
ordinary cases are less advantageous to the country, the profit
should happen to rise somewhat higher than what is sufficient to
balance the natural preference which is given to nearer
employments, this superiority of profit will draw stock from
those nearer employments, till the profits of all return to their
proper level. This superiority of profit, however, is a proof
that, in the actual circumstances of the society, those distant
employments are somewhat understocked in proportion to other
employments, and that the stock of the society is not distributed
in the properest manner among all the different employments
carried on in it. It is a proof that something is either bought
cheaper or sold dearer than it ought to be, and that some
particular class of citizens is more or less oppressed, either by
paying more, or by getting less than what is suitable to that
equality which ought to take place, and which naturally does take
place, among all the different classes of them. Though the same
capital never will maintain the same quantity of productive
labour in a distant as in a near employment, yet a distant
employment maybe as necessary for the welfare of the society as a
near one; the goods which the distant employment deals in being
necessary, perhaps, for carrying on many of the nearer
employments. But if the profits of those who deal in such goods
are above their proper level, those goods will be sold dearer
than they ought to be, or somewhat above their natural price, and
all those engaged in the nearer employments will be more or less
oppressed by this high price. Their interest, therefore, in this
case, requires, that some stock should be withdrawn from those
nearer employments, and turned towards that distant one, in order
to reduce its profits to their proper level, and the price of the
goods which it deals in to their natural price.     In this
extraordinary case, the public interest requires that some stock
should be withdrawn from those employments which, in ordinary
cases, are more advantageous, and turned towards one which, in
ordinary cases, is less advantageous to the public; and, in this
extraordinary case, the natural interests and inclinations of men
coincide as exactly with the public interests as in all other
ordinary cases, and lead them to withdraw stock from the near,
and to turn it towards the distant employments.

It is thus that the private interests and passions of individuals
naturally dispose them to turn their stock towards the
employments which in ordinary cases, are most advantagenus to the
society. But if from this natural preference they should turn too
much of it towards those employments, the fall of profit in them,
and the rise of it in all others, immediately dispose them to
alter this faulty distribution. Without any intervention of law,
therefore, the private interests and passions of men naturally
lead them to divide and distribute the stock of every society
among all the different employments carried on in it; as nearly
as possible in the proportion which is most agreeable to the
interest of the whole society.

All the different regulations of the mercantile system
necessarily derange more or less this natural and most
advantageous distribution of stock. But those which concern the
trade to America and the East Indies derange it, perhaps, more
than any other ; because the trade to those two great continents
absorbs a greater quantity of stock than any two other branches
of trade. The regulations, however, by which this derangement is
effected in those two different branches of trade, are not
altogether the same. Monopoly is the great engine of both ; but
it is a different sort of monopoly. Monopoly of one kind or
another, indeed, seems to be the sole engine of the mercantile
system.

In the trade to America, every nation endeavours to engross as
much as possible the whole market of its own colonies, by fairly
excluding all other nations from any direct trade to them. During
the greater part of the sixteenth century, the Portuguese
endeavoured to manage the trade to the East Indies in the same
manner, by claiming the sole right of sailing in the Indian seas,
on account of the merit of having first found out the road to
them. The Dutch still continue to exclude all other European
nations from any direct trade to their spice islands. Monopolies
of this kind are evidently established against all other European
nations, who are thereby not only excluded from a trade to which
it might be convenient for them to turn some part of their stock,
but are obliged to buy the goods which that trade deals in,
somewhat dearer than if they could import them themselves
directly from the countries which produced them.

But since the fall of the power of Portugal, no European nation
has claimed the exclusive right of sailing in the Indian seas, of
which the principal ports are now open to the ships of all
European nations. Except in Portugal, however, and within these
few years in France, the trade to the East Indies has, in every
European country, been subjected to an exclusive company.
Monopolies of this kind are properly established against the very
nation which erects them. The greater part of that nation are
thereby not only excluded from a trade to which it might be
convenient for them to turn some part of their stock, but are
obliged to buy the goods which that trade deals in somewhat
dearer than if it was open and free to all their countrymen.
Since the establishment of the English East India company, for
example, the other inhabitants of England, over and above being
excluded from the trade, must have paid, in the price of the East
India goods which they have consumed, not only for all the
extraordinary profits which the company may have made upon those
goods in consequence of their monopoly, but for all the
extraordinary waste which the fraud and abuse inseparable from
the management of the affairs of so great a company must
necessarily have occasioned. The absurdity of this second kind of
monopoly, therefore, is much more manifest than that of the
first.

Both these kinds of monopolies derange more or less the natural
distribution of the stock of the society ; but they do not always
derange it in the same way.

Monopolies of the first kind always attract to the particular
trade in which they are established a greater proportion of the
stock of the society than what would go to that trade of its own
accord.

Monopolies of the second kind may sometimes attract stock towards
the particular trade in which they are established, and sometimes
repel it from that trade, according to different circumstances.
In poor countries, they naturally attract towards that trade more
stock than would otherwise go to it. In rich countries, they
naturally repel from it a good deal of stock which would
otherwise go to it.

Such poor countries as Sweden and Denmark, for example, would
probably have never sent a single ship to the East Indies, had
not the trade been subjected to an exclusive company. The
establishment of such a conpany necessarily encourages
adventurers. Their monopoly secures them against all competitors
in the home market, and they have the same chance for foreign
markets with the traders of other nations. Their monopoly shows
them the certainty of a great profit upon a considerable quantity
of goods, and the chance of a considerable profit upon a great
quantity. Without such extraordinary encouragement, the poor
traders of such poor countries would probably never have thought
of hazarding their small capitals in so very distant and
uncertain an adventure as the trade to the East Indies must
naturally have appeared to them.

Such a rich country as Holland, on the contrary, would probably,
in the case of a free trade, send many more ships to the East
Indies than it actually does. The limited stock of the Dutch East
India company probably repels from that trade many great
mercantile capitals which would otherwise go to it. The
mercantile capital of Holland is so great, that it is, as it
were, continually overflowing, sometimes into the public funds of
foreign countries, sometimes into loans to private traders and
adventurers of foreign countries, sometimes into the most
round-about foreign trades of consumption, and sometimes into the
carrying trade. All near employments being completely filled up,
all the capital which can be placed in them with any tolerable
profit being already placed in them, the capital of Holland
necessarily flows towards the most distant employments. The trade
to the East Indies, if it were altogether free, would probably
absorb the greater part of this redundant capital. The East
Indies offer a market both for the manufactures of Europe, and
for the gold and silver, as well as for the several other
productions of America, greater and more extensive than both
Europe and America put together.

Every derangement of the natural distribution of stock is
necessarily hurtful to the society in which it takes place;
whether it be by repelling from a particular trade the stock
which would otherwise go to it, or by attracting towards a
particular trade that which would not otherwise come to it. If,
without any exclusive company, the trade of Holland to the East
Indies would be greater than it actually is, that country must
suffer a considerable loss, by part of its capital being excluded
from the employment most convenient for that port. And, in the
same manner, if, without an exclusive company, the trade of
Sweden and Denmark to the East Indies would be less than it
actually is, or, what perhaps is more probable, would not exist
at all, those two countries must likewise suffer a considerable
loss, by part of their capital being drawn into an employment
which must be more or less unsuitable to their present
circumstances. Better for them, perhaps, in the present
circumstances, to buy East India goods of other nations, even
though they should pay somewhat dearer, than to turn so great a
part of their small capital to so very distant a trade, in which
the returns are so very slow, in which that capital can maintain
so small a quantity of productive labour at home, where
productive labour is so much wanted, where so little is done, and
where so much is to do.

Though without an exclusive company, therefore, a particular
country should not be able to carry on any direct trade to the
East Indies, it will not from thence follow, that such a company
ought to be established there, but only that such a country ought
not, in these circumstances, to trade directly to the East
Indies. That such companies are not in general necessary for
carrying on the East India trade, is sufficiently demonstrated by
the experience of the Portuguese, who enjoyed almost the whole of
it for more than a century together, without any exclusive
company.

No private merchant, it has been said, could well have capital
sufficient to maintain factors and agents in the different ports
of the East Indies, in order to provide goods for the ships which
he might occasionally send thither; and yet, unless he was able
to do this, the difficulty of finding a cargo might frequently
make his ships lose the season for returning; and the expense of
so long a delay would not only eat up the whole profit of the
adventure, but frequently occasion a very considerable loss. This
argument, however, if it proved any thing at all, would prove
that no one great branch of trade could be carried on without an
exclusive company, which is contrary to the experience of all
nations. There is no great branch of trade, in which the capital
of any one private merchant is sufficient for carrying on all the
subordinate branches which must be carried on, in order to carry
on the principal one. But when a nation is ripe for any great
branch of trade, some merchants naturally turn their capitals
towards the principal, and some towards the subordinate branches
of it; and though all the different branches of it are in this
manner carried on, yet it very seldom happens that they are all
carried on by the capital of one private merchant. If a nation,
therefore, is ripe for the East India trade, a certain portion of
its capital will naturally divide itself among all the different
branches of that trade. Some of its merchants will find it for
their interest to reside in the East Indies, and to employ their
capitals there in providing goods for the ships which are to be
sent out by other merchants who reside in Europe. The settlements
which different European nations have obtained in the East
Indies, if they were taken from the exclusive companies to which
they at present belong, and put under the immediate protection of
the sovereign, would render this residence both safe and easy, at
least to the merchants of the particular nations to whom those
settlements belong. If, at any particular time, that part of the
capital of any country which of its own accord tended and
inclined, if I may say so, towards the East India trade, was not
sufficient for carrying on all those different branches of it, it
would be a proof that, at that particular time, that country was
not ripe for that trade, and that it would do better to buy for
some time, even at a higher price, from other European nations,
the East India goods it had occasion for, than to import them
itself directly from the East Indies. What it might lose by the
high price of those goods, could seldom be equal to the loss
which it would sustain by the distraction of a large portion of
its capital from other employments more necessary, or more
useful, or more suitable to its circumstances and situation, than
a direct trade to the East Indies.

Though the Europeans possess many considerable settlements both
upon the coast of Africa and in the East Indies, they have not
yet established, in either of those countries, such numerous and
thriving colonies as those in the islands and continent of
America. Africa, however, as well as several of the countries
comprehended under the general name of the East Indies, is
inhabited by barbarous nations. But those nations were by no
means so weak and defenceless as the miserable and helpless
Americans ; and in proportion to the natural fertility of the
countries which they inhabited, they were, besides, much more
populous. The most barbarous nations either of Africa or of the
East Indies, were shepherds; even the Hottentots were so. But the
natives of every part of America, except Mexico and Peru, were
only hunters and the difference is very great between the number
of shepherds and that of hunters whom the same extent of equally
fertile territory can maintain. In Africa and the East Indies,
therefore, it was more difficult to displace the natives, and to
extend the European plantations over the greater part of the
lands of the original inhabitants.     The genius of exclusive
companies, besides, is unfavourable, it has already been
observed, to the growth of new colonies, and has probably been
the principal cause of the little progress which they have made
in the East Indies. The Portuguese carried on the trade both to
Africa and the East Indies, without any exclusive companies; and
their settlements at Congo, Angola, and Benguela, on the coast of
Africa, and at Goa in the East Indies though much depressed by
superstition and every sort of bad government, yet bear some
resemblance to the colonies of America, and are partly inhabited
by Portuguese who have been established there for several
generations. The Dutch settlmnents at the Cape of Good Hope and
at Batavia, are at present the most considerable colonies which
the Europeans have established, either in Africa or in the East
Indies; and both those settlements an peculiarly fortunate in
their situation. The Cape of Good Hope was inhabited by a race of
people almost as barbarous, and quite as incapable of defending
themselves, as the natives of America. It is, besides, the
half-way house, if one may say so, between Europe and the East
Indies, at which almost every European ship makes some stay, both
in going and returning. The supplying of those ships with every
sort of fresh provisions, with fruit, and sometimes with wine,
affords alone a very extensive market for the surplus produce of
the colonies. What the Cape of Good Hope is between Europe and
every part of the East Indies, Batavia is between the principal
countries of the East Indies. It lies upon the most frequented
road from Indostan to China and Japan, and is nearly about
mid-way upon that road. Almost all the ships too, that sail
between Europe and China, touch at Batavia; and it is, over and
above all this, the centre and principal mart of what is called
the country trade of the East Indies; not only of that part of it
which is carried on by Europeans, but of that which is carried on
by the native Indians; and vessels navigated by the inhabitants
of China and Japan, of Tonquin, Malacca, Cochin-China, and the
island of Celebes, are frequently to be seen in its port. Such
advantageous situations have enabled those two colonies to
surmount all the obstacles which the oppressive genius of an
exclusive company may have occasionally opposed to their growth.
They have enabled Batavia to surmount the additional disadvantage
of perhaps the most unwholesome climate in the world.

The English and Dutch companies, though they have established no
considerable colonies, except the two above mentioned, have both
made considerable conquests in the East Indies. But in the manner
in which they both govern their new subjects, the natural genius
of an exclusive company has shewn itself most distinctly. In the
spice islands, the Dutch are said to burn all the spiceries which
a fertile season produces, beyond what they expect to dispose of
in Europe with such a profit as they think sufficient. In the
islands where they have no settlements, they give a premium to
those who collect the young blossoms and green leaves of the
clove and nutmeg trees, which naturally grow there, but which
this savage policy has now, it is said. almost completely
extirpated. Even in the islands where they have settlements, they
have very much reduced, it is said, the number of those trees. If
the produce even of their own islands was much greater than what
suited their market, the natives, they suspect, might find means
to convey some part of it to other nations; and the best way,
they imagine, to secure their own monopoly, is to take care that
no more shall grow than what they themselves carry to market. By
different arts of oppression, they have reduced the population of
several of the Moluccas nearly to the number which is sufficient
to supply with fresh provisions, and other necessaries of life,
their own insignificant garrisons, and such of their ships as
occasionally come there for a cargo of spices. Under the
government even of the Portuguese, however, those islands are
said to have been tolerably well inhabited. The English company
have not yet had time to establish in Bengal so perfectly
destructive a system. The plan of their government, however, has
had exactly the same tendency. It has not been uncommon, I am
well assured, for the chief, that is, the first clerk or a
factory, to order a peasant to plough up a rich field of poppies,
and sow it with rice, or some other grain. The pretence was, to
prevent a scarcity of provisions; but the real reason, to give
the chief an opportunity of selling at a better price a large
quantity of opium which he happened then to have upon hand. Upon
other occasions, the order has been reversed ; and a rich field
of rice or other grain has been ploughed up, in order to make
room for a plantation of poppies, when the chief foresaw that
extraordinary profit was likely to be made by opium. The servants
of the company have, upon several occasions, attempted to
establish in their own favour the monopoly of some of the most
important branches, not only of the foreign, but of the inland
trade of the country. Had they been allowed to go on, it is
impossible that they should not, at some time or another, have
attempted to restrain the production of the particular articles
of which they had thus usurped the monopoly, not only to the
quantity which they themselves could purchase, but to that which
they could expect to sell with such a profit as they might think
sufficient. In the course of a century or two, the policy of the
English company would, in this manner, have probably proved as
completely destructive as that of the Dutch.

Nothing, however, can be more directly contrary to the real
interest of those companies, considered as the sovereigns of the
countries which they have conquered, than this destructive plan.
In almost all countries, the revenue of the sovereign is drawn
from that of the people. The greater the revenue of the people,
therefore, the greater the annual produce of their land and
labour, the more they can afford to the sovereign. It is his
interest, therefore, to increase as much as possible that annual
produce. But if this is the interest of every sovereign, it is
peculiarly so of one whose revenue, like that of the sovereign of
Bengal, arises chiefly from a land-rent. That rent must
necessarily be in proportion to the quantity and value of the
produce; and both the one and the other must depend upon the
extent of the market. The quantity will always be suited, with
more or less exactness, to the consumption of those who can
afford to pay for it; and the price which they will pay will
always be in proportion to the eagerness of their competition. It
is the interest of such a sovereign, therefore, to open the most
extensive market for the produce of his country, to allow the
most perfect freedom of commerce, in order to increase as much as
possible the number and competition of buyers ; and upon this
account to abolish, not only all monopolies, but all restraints
upon the transportation of the home produce from one part of the
country to mother, upon its exportation to foreign countries, or
upon the importation of goods of' any kind for which it can be
exchanged. He is in this manner most likely to increase both the
quantity and value of that produce, and consequently of his own
share of it, or of his own revenue.

But a company of merchants, are, it seems, incapable of
considering themselves as sovereigns, even after they have become
such. Trade, or buying in order to sell again, they still
consider as their principal business, and by a strange absurdity,
regard the character of the sovereign as but an appendix to that
of the merchant ; as something which ought to be made subservient
to it, or by means of which they may be enabled to buy cheaper in
India, and thereby to sell with a better profit in Europe. They
endeavour, for this purpose, to keep out as much as possible all
competitors from the market of the countries which are subject to
their government, and consequently to reduce, at least, some part
of the surplus produce of those countries to what is barely
sufficient for supplying their own demand, or to what they can
expect to sell in Europe, with such a profit as they may think
reasonable. Their mercantile habits draw them in this manner,
almost necessarily, though perhaps insensibly, to prefer, upon
all ordinary occasions, the little and transitory profit of the
monopolist to the great and permanent revenue of the sovereign;
and would gradually lead them to treat the countries subject to
their government nearly as the Dutch treat the Moluccas. It is
the interest of the East India company, considered as sovereigns,
that the European goods which are carried to their Indian
dominions should be sold there as cheap as possible; and that the
Indian goods which are brought from thence should bring there as
good a price, or should be sold there as dear as possible. But
the reverse of this is their interest as merchants. As
sovereigns, their interest is exactly the same with that of the
country which they govern. As merchants, their interest is
directly opposite to that interest.

But if the genius of such a government, even as to what concerns
its direction in Earope, is in this manner essentially, and
perhaps incurably faulty, that of its administration in India is
still more so. That administration is necessarily composed of a
council of merchants, a profession no doubt extremely
respectable, but which in no country in the world carries along
with it that sort of authority which naturally overawes the
people, and without force commands their willing obedience. Such
a council can command obedience only by the military force with
which they are accompanied ; and their government is, therefore,
necessarily military and despotical. Their proper business,
however, is that of merchants. It is to sell, upon their master's
account, the European goods consigned to them, and to buy, in
return, Indian goods for the European market. It is to sell the
one as dear, and to buy the other as cheap as possible, and
consequently to exclude, as much as possible, all rivals from the
particular market where they keep their shop. The genius of the
administration, therefore, so far as concerns the trade of the
company, is the same as that of the direction. It tends to make
government subservient to the interest of monopoly, and
consequently to stunt the natural growth of some parts, at least,
of the surplus produce of the country, to what is barely
sufficient for answering the demand of the company,

All the members of the administration besides, trade more or less
upon their own account; and it is in vain to prohibit them from
doing so. Nothing can be more completely foolish than to expect
that the clerk of a great counting-house, at ten thousand miles
distance, and consequently almost quite out of sight, should,
upon a simple order from their master, give up at once doing any
sort of business upon their own account abandon for ever all
hopes of making a fortune, of which they have the means in their
hands; and content themselves with the moderate salaries which
those masters allow them, and which, moderate as they are, can
seldom be augmented, being commonly as large as the real profits
of the company trade can afford. In such circumstances, to
prohibit the servants of the company from trading upon their own
account, can have scarce any other effect than to enable its
superior servants, under pretence of executing their master's
order, to oppress such of the inferior ones as have had the
misfortune to fall under their displeasure.      The servants
naturally endeavour to establish the same monopoly in favour of
their own private trade as of the public trade of the company. If
they are suffered to act as they could wish, they will establish
this monopoly openly and directly, by fairly prohibiting all
other people from trading in the articles in which they choose to
deal; and this, perhaps, is the best and least oppressive way of
establishing it. But if, by an order from Europe, they are
prohibited from doing this, they will, notwithstanding, endeavour
to establish a monopoly of the same kind secretly and indirectly,
in a way that is much more destructive to the country. They will
employ the whole authority of government, and pervert the
administration of Justice, in order to harass and ruin those who
interfere with them in any branch of commerce, which by means of
agents, either concealed, or at least not publicly avowed, they
may choose to carry on. But the private trade of the servants
will naturally extend to a much greater variety of articles than
the public trade of the company. The public trade of the company
extends no further than the trade with Europe, and comprehends a
part only of the foreign trade of the country. But the private
trade of the servants may extend to all the different branches
both of its inland and foreign trade. The monopoly of the company
can tend only to stunt the natural growth of that part of the
surplus produce which, in the case of a free trade, would be
exported to Europe. That of the servants tends to stunt the
natural growth of every part of the produce in which they choose
to deal; of what is destined for home consumption, as well as of
what is destined for exportation; and consequently to degrade the
cultivation of the whole country, and to reduce the number of its
inhabitants. It tends to reduce the quantity of every sort of
produce, even that of the necessaries of life, whenever the
servants of the country choose to deal in them, to what those
servants can both afford to buy and expect to sell with such a
profit as pleases them.

From the nature of their situation, too, the servants must be
more disposed to support with rigourous severity their own
interest, against that of the country which they govern, than
their masters can be to support theirs. The country belongs to
their masters, who cannot avoid having some regard for the
interest of what belongs to them; but it does not belong to the
servants. The real interest of their masters, if they were
capable of understanding it, is the same with that of the
country; {The interest of every proprietor of India stock,
however, is by no means the same with that of the country in the
government of which his vote gives him some influence. - See book
v, chap. 1, part ii.}and it is from ignorance chiefly, and the
meanness of mercantile prejudice, that they ever oppress it. But
the real interest of the servants is by no means the same with
that of the country, and the most perfect information would not
necessarily put an end to their oppressions. The regulations,
accordingly, which have been sent out from Europe, though they
have been frequently weak, have upon most occasions been well
meaning. More intelligence, and perhaps less good meaning, has
sometimes appeared in those established by the servants in India.
It is a very singular government in which every member of the
administration wishes to get out of the country, and consequently
to have done with the government, as soon as he can, and to whose
interest, the day after he has left it, and carried his whole
fortune with him, it is perfectly indifferent though the whole
country was swallowed up by an earthquake.

I mean not, however, by any thing which I have here said, to
throw any odious imputation upon the general character of the
servants of the East India company, and touch less upon that of
any particular persons. It is the system of government, the
situation in which they are placed, that I mean to censure, not
the character of those who have acted in it. They acted as their
situation naturally directed, and they who have clamoured the
loudest against them would probably not have acted better
themselves. In war and negotiation, the councils of Madras and
Calcutta, have upon several occasions, conducted themselves with
a resolution and decisive wisdom, which would have done honour to
the senate of Rome in the best days of that republic. The members
of those councils, however, had been bred to professions very
different from war and politics. But their situation alone,
without education, experience, or even example, seems to have
formed in them all at once the great qualities which it required,
and to have inspired them both with abilities and virtues which
they themselves could not well know that they possessed. If upon
some occasions, therefore, it has animated them to actions of
magnanimity which could not well have been expected from them, we
should not wonder if, upon others, it has prompted them to
exploits of somewhat a different nature.

Such exclusive companies, therefore, are nuisances in every
respect; always more or less inconvenient to the countries in
which they are established, and destructive to those which have
the misfortune to fall under their government.





CHAPTER      VIII.


CONCLUSION OF THE MERCANTILE SYSTEM.

Though the encouragement of exportation, and the discouragement
of importation, are the two great engines by which the mercantile
system proposes to enrich every country, yet, with regard to some
particular commodities, it seems to follow an opposite plan : to
discourage exportation, and to encourage importation. Its
ultimate object, however, it pretends, is always the same, to
enrich the country by an advantageous balance of trade. It
discourages the exportation of the materials of manufacture, and
of the instruments of trade, in order to give our own workmen an
advantage, and to enable them to undersell those of other nations
in all foreign markets; and by restraining, in this manner, the
exportation of a few commodities, of no great price, it proposes
to occasion a much greater and more valuable exportation of
others. It encourages the importation of the materials of
manufacture, in order that our own people may be enabled to work
them up more cheaply, and thereby prevent a greater and more
valuable importation of the manufactured commodities. I do not
observe, at least in our statute book, any encouragement given to
the importation of the instruments of trade. When manufactures
have advanced to a certain pitch of greatness, the fabrication of
the instruments of trade becomes itself the object of agreat
number of very important manufactures. To give any particular
encouragement to the importation of such instruments, would
interfere too much with the interest of those manufactures. Such
importation, therefore, instead of being encouraged, has
frequently been prohibited. Thus the importation of wool cards,
except from Ireland, or when brought in as wreck or prize goods,
was prohibited by the 3rd of Edward IV. ; which prohibition was
renewed by the 39th of Elizabeth, and has been continued and
rendered perpetual by subsequent laws.

The importation of the materials of manufacture has sometimes
been encouraged by an exemption from the duties to which other
goods are subject, and sometimes by bounties.

The importation of sheep's wool from several different countries,
of cotton wool from all countries, of undressed flax, of the
greater part of dyeing drugs, of the greater part of undressed
hides from Ireland, or the British colonies, of seal skins from
the British Greenland fishery, of pig and bar iron from the
British colonies, as well as of several other materials of
manufacture, has been encouraged by an exemption from all duties,
if properly entered at the custom-house. The private interest of
our merchants and manufacturers may, perhaps, have extorted from
the legislature these exemptions, as well as the greater part of
our other commercial regulations. They are, however, perfectly
just and reasonable; and if, consistently with the necessities of
the state, they could be extended to all the other materials of
manufacture, the public would certainly be a gainer.

The avidity of our great manufacturers, however, has in some
cases extended these exemptions a good deal beyond what can
justly be considered as the rude materials of their work. By the
24th Geo. II. chap. 46, a small duty of only 1d. the pound was
imposed upon the importation of foreign brown linen yarn, instead
of much higher duties, to which it had been subjected before,
viz. of 6d. the pound upon sail yarn, of 1s. the pound upon all
French and Dutch yarn, and of 2:13:4 upon the hundred weight of
all spruce or Muscovia yarn. But our manufacturers were not long
satisfied with this reduction: by the 29th of the same king,
chap. 15, the same law which gave a bounty upon the exportation
of British and Irish linen, of which the price did not exceed
18d. the yard, even this small duty upon the importation of brown
linen yarn was taken away. In the different operations, however,
which are necessary for the preparation of linen yarn, a good
deal more industry is employed, than in the subsequent operation
of preparing linen cloth from linen yarn. To say nothing of the
industry of the flax-growers and flaxdressers, three or four
spinners at least are necessary in order to keep one weaver in
constant employment; and more than four-fifths of the whole
quantity of labour necessary for the preparation of linen cloth,
is employed in that of linen yarn ; but our spinners are poor
people; women commonly scattered about in all different parts of
the country, without support or protection. It is not by the sale
of their work, but by that of the complete work of the weavers,
that our great master manufacturers make their profits. As it is
their interest to sell the complete manufacture as dear, so it is
to buy the materials as cheap as possible. By extorting from the
legislature bounties upon the exportation of their own linen,
high duties upon the importation of all foreign linen, and a
total prohibition of the home consumption of some sorts of French
linen, they endeavour to sell their own goods as dear as
possible. By encouraging the importation of foreign linen yarn,
and thereby bringing it into competition with that which is made
by our own people, they endeavour to buy the work of the poor
spinners as cheap as possible. They are as intent to keep down
the wages of their own weavers, as the earnings of the poor
spinners ; and it is by no means for the benefit of the workmen
that they endeavour either to raise the price of the complete
work, or to lower that of the rude materials. It is the industry
which is carried on for the benefit of the rich and the powerful,
that is principally encouraged by our mercantile system. That
which is carried on for the benefit of the poor and the indigent
is too often either neglected or oppressed.

Both the bounty upon the exportation of linen, and the exemption
from the duty upon the importation of foreign yarn, which were
granted only for fifteen years, but continued by two different
prolongations, expire with the end of the session of parliament
which shall immediately follow the 24th of June 1786.

The encouragement given to the importation of the materials of
manufacture by bounties, has been principally confined to such as
were imported from our American plantations.

The first bounties of this kind were those granted about the
beginning of the present century, upon the importation of naval
stores from America. Under this denomination were comprehended
timber fit for masts, yards, and bowsprits; hemp, tar, pitch, and
turpentine. The bounty, however, of 1 the ton upon
masting-timber, and that of 6 the ton upon hemp, were extended
to such as should be imported into England from Scotland. Both
these bounties continued, without any variation, at the same
rate, till they were severally allowed to expire; that upon hemp
on the 1st of January 1741, and that upon masting-timber at the
end of the session of parliament immediately following the 24th
June 1781.

The bounties upon the importation of tar, pitch, and turpentine,
underwent, during their continuance, several alterations.
Originally, that upon tar was 4 the ton ; that upon pitch the
same; and that upon turpentine 3 the ton. The bounty of 4 the
ton upon tar was afterwards confined to such as had been prepared
in a particular manner ; that upon other good, clean, and
merchantable tar was reduced to 2:4s. the ton. The bounty upon
pitch was likewise reduced to 1, and that upon turpentine to
1:10s. the ton.

The second bounty upon the importation of any of the materials of
manufacture, according to the order of time, was that granted by
the 21st Geo. II. chap.30, upon the importation of indigo from
the British plantations. When the plantation indigo was worth
three-fourths of the price of the best French indigo, it was, by
this act, entitled to a bounty of 6d. the pound. This bounty,
which, like most others, was granted only for a limited time, was
continued by several prolongations, but was reduced to 4d. the
pound. It was allowed to expire with the end of the session of
parliament which followed the 25th March 1781.

The third bounty of this kind was that granted (much about the
time that we were beginning sometimes to court, and sometimes to
quarrel with our American colonies), by the 4th. Geo. III. chap.
26, upon the importation of hemp, or undressed flax, from the
British plantations. This bounty was granted for twenty-one
years, from the 24th June 1764 to the 24th June 1785. For the
first seven years, it was to be at the rate of 8 the ton; for
the second at 6; and for the third at 4. It was not extended to
Scotland, of which the climate (although hemp is sometimes raised
there in small quantities, and of an inferior quality) is not
very fit for that produce. Such a bounty upon the importation of
Scotch flax in England would have been too great a discouragement
to the native produce of the southern part of the united kingdom.

The fourth bounty of this kind was that granted by the 5th Geo.
III. chap. 45, upon the importation of wood from America. It was
granted for nine years from the 1st January 1766 to the 1st
January 1775. During the first three years, it was to be for
every hundred-and-twenty good deals, at the rate of 1, and for
every load containing fifty cubic feet of other square timber, at
the rate of 12s. For the second three years, it was for deals, to
be at the rate of 15s., and for other squared timber at the rate
of 8s.; and for the third three years, it was for deals, to be at
the rate of 10s.; and for every other squared timber at the rate
of 5s.

The fifth bounty of this kind was that granted by the 9th Geo.
III. chap. 38, upon the importation of raw silk from the British
plantations. It was granted for twenty-one years, from the 1st
January 1770, to the 1st January 1791. For the first seven years,
it was to be at the rate of 25 for every hundred pounds value ;
for the second, at 20; and for the third, at 15. The management
of the silk-worm, and the preparation of silk, requires so much
hand-labour, and labour is so very dear in America, that even
this great bounty, I have been informed, was not likely to
produce any considerable effect.

The sixth Bounty of this kind was that granted by 11th Geo. III.
chap. 50, for the importation of pipe, hogshead, and barrelstaves
and leading from the British plantations. It was granted for nine
years, from 1st January 1772 to the 1st January 1781. For the
first three years, it was, for a certain quantity of each, to be
at the rate of 6; for the second three years at 4; and for the
third three years at 2.

The seventh and last bounty of this kind was that granted by the
19th Geo. III chap. 37, upon the importation of hemp from
Ireland. It was granted in the same manner as that for the
importation of hemp and undressed flax from America, for
twenty-one years, from the 24th June 1779 to the 24th June 1800.
The term is divided likewise into three periods, of seven years
each; and in each of those periods, the rate of the Irish bounty
is the same with that of the American. It does not, however, like
the American bounty, extend to the importation of undressed flax.
It would have been too great a discouragement to the cultivation
of that plant in Great Britain. When this last bounty was
granted, the British and Irish legislatures were not in much
better humour with one another, than the British and American had
been before. But this boon to Ireland, it is to be hoped, has
been granted under more fortunate auspices than all those to
America. The same commodities, upon which we thus gave bounties,
when imported from America, were subjected to considerable duties
when imported from any other country. The interest of our
American colonies was regarded as the same with that of the
mother country. Their wealth was considered as our wealth.
Whatever money was sent out to them, it was said, came all back
to us by the balance of trade, and we could never become a
farthing the poorer by any expense which we could lay out upon
them. They were our own in every respect, and it was an expense
laid out upon the improvement of our own property, and for the
profitable employment of our own people. It is unnecessary, I
apprehend, at present to say anything further, in order to expose
the folly of a system which fatal experience has now sufficiently
exposed. Had our American colonies really been a part of Great
Britain, those bounties might have been considered as bounties
upon production, and would still have been liable to all the
objections to which such bounties are liable, but to no other.

The exportation of the materials of manufacture is sometimes
discouraged by absolute prohibitions, and sometimes by high
duties.

Our woollen manufacturers have been more successful than any
other class of workmen, in persuading the legislature that the
prosperity of the nation depended upon the success and extension
of their particular business. They have not only obtained a
monopoly against the consumers, by an absolute prohibition of
importing woollen cloths from any foreign country; but they have
likewise obtained another monopoly against the sheep farmers and
growers of wool, by a similar prohibition of the exportation of
live sheep and wool. The severity of many of the laws which have
been enacted for the security of the revenue is very justly
complained of, as imposing heavy penalties upon actions which,
antecedent to the statutes that declared them to be crimes, had
always been understood to be innocent. But the cruellest of our
revenue laws, I will venture to affirm, are mild and gentle, in
comparison to some of those which the clamour of our merchants
and manufacturers has extorted from the legisiature, for the
support of their own absurd and oppressive monopolies. Like the
laws of Draco, these laws may be said to be all written in blood.

By the 8th of Elizabeth, chap. 3, the exporter of sheep, lambs,
or rams, was for the first offence, to forfeit all his goods for
ever, to suffer a year's imprisonment, and then to have his left
hand cut off in a market town, upon a market day, to be there
nailed up; and for the second offence, to be adjudged a felon,
and to suffer death accordingly. To prevent the breed of our
sheep from being propagated in foreign countries, seems to have
been the object of this law. By the 13th and 14th of Charles II.
chap. 18, the exportation of wool was made felony, and the
exporter subjected to the same penalties and forfeitures as a
felon.

For the honour of the national humanity, it is to be hoped that
neither of these statutes was ever executed. The first of them,
however, so far as I know, has never been directly repealed, and
serjeant Hawkins seems to consider it as still in force. It may,
however, perhaps be considered as virtually repealed by the 12th
of Charles II. chap. 32, sect. 3, which, without expressly taking
away the penalties imposed by former statutes, imposes a new
penalty, viz. that of 20s. for every sheep exported, or attempted
to be exported, together with the forfeiture of the sheep, and of
the owner's share of the sheep. The second of them was expressly
repealed by the 7th and 8th of William III. chap. 28, sect. 4, by
which it is declared that " Whereas the statute of the 13th and
14th of king Charles II. made against the exportation of wool,
among other things in the said act mentioned, doth enact the same
to be deemed felony, by the severity of which penalty the
prosecution of offenders hath not been so effectually put in
execution ; be it therefore enacted, by the authority aforesaid,
that so much of the said act, which relates to the making the
said offence felony, be repealed and made void."

The penalties, however, which are either imposed by this milder
statute, or which, though imposed by former statutes, are not
repealed by this one, are still sufficiently severe. Besides the
forfeiture of the goods, the exporter incurs the penalty of 3s.
for every pound weight of wool, either exported or attempted to
be exported, that is, about four or five times the value. Any
merchant, or other person convicted of this offence, is disabled
from requiring any debt or account belonging to him from any
factor or other person.     Let his fortune be what it will,
whether he is or is not able to pay those heavy penalties, the
law means to ruin him completely. But, as the morals of the great
body of the people are not yet so corrupt as those of the
contrivers of this statute, I have not heard that any advantage
has ever been taken of this clause. If the person convicted of
this offence is not able to pay the penalties within three months
after judgment, he is to be transported for seven years; and if
he returns before the expiration of that term, he is liable to
the pains of felony, without benefit of clergy. The owner of the
ship, knowing this offence, forfeits all his interest in the ship
and furniture. The master and mariners, knowing this offence,
forfeit all their goods and chattels, and suffer three months
imprisonment. By a subsequent statute, the master suffers six
months imprisonment.

In order to prevent exportation, the whole inland commerce of
wool is laid under very burdensome and oppressive restrictions.
It cannot be packed in any box, barrel, cask, case, chest, or any
other package, but only in packs of leather or pack-cloth, on
which must be marked on the outside the words WOOL or YARN, in
large letters, not less than three inches long, on pain of
forfeiting the same and the package, and 8s. for every pound
weight, to be paid by the owner or packer. It cannot be loaden on
any horse or cart, or carried by land within five miles of the
coast, but between sun-rising, and sun-setting, on pain of
forfeiting the same, the horses and carriages. The hundred next
adjoining to the sea coast, out of, or through which the wool is
carried or exported, forfeits 20, if the wool is under the value
of 10; and if of greater value, then treble that value, together
with treble costs, to be sued for within the year. The execution
to be against any two of the inhabitants, whom the sessions must
reimburse, by an assessment on the other inhabitants, as in the
cases of robbery. And if any person compounds with the hundred
for less than this penalty, he is to be imprisoned for five
years; and any other person may prosecute. These regulations take
place through the whole kingdom.

But in the particular counties of Kent and Sussex, the
restrictions are still more troublesome. Every owner of wool
within ten miles of the sea coast must give an account in
writing, three days after shearing, to the next officer of the
customs, of the number of his fleeces, and of the places where
they are lodged. And before he removes any part of them, he must
give the like notice of the number and weight of the fleeces, and
of the name and abode of the person to whom they are sold, and of
the place to which it is intended they should be carried. No
person within fifteen miles of the sea, in the said counties, can
buy any wool, before he enters into bond to the king, that no
part of the wool which he shall so buy shall be sold by him to
any other person within fifteen miles of the sea. If any wool is
found carrying towards the sea side in the said counties, unless
it has been entered and security given as aforesaid, it is
forfeited, and the offender also forfeits 3s. for every pound
weight. if any person lay any wool, not entered as aforesaid,
within fifteen miles of the sea, it must be seized and forfeited
; and if, after such seizure, any person shall claim the same, he
must give security to the exchequer, that if he is cast upon
trial he shall pay treble costs, besides all other penalties.

When such restrictions are imposed upon the inland trade, the
coasting trade, we may believe, cannot be left very free. Every
owner of wool, who carrieth, or causeth to be carried, any wool
to any port or place on the sea coast, in order to be from thence
transported by sea to any other place or port on the coast, must
first cause an entry thereof to be made at the port from whence
it is intended to be conveyed, containing the weight, marks, and
number, of the packages, before he brings the same within five
miles of that port, on pain of forfeiting the same, and also the
horses, carts, and other carriages; and also of suffering and
forfeiting, as by the other laws in force against the exportation
of wool. This law, however (1st of William III. chap. 32), is so
very indulgent as to declare, that this shall not hinder any
person from carrying his wool home from the place of shearing,
though it be within five miles of the sea, provided that in ten
days after shearing, and before he remove the wool, he do under
his hand certify to the next officer of the customs the true
number of fleeces, and where it is housed; and do not remove the
same, without certifying to such officer, under his hand, his
intention so to do, three days before.  Bond must be given that
the wool to be carried coast-ways is to be landed at the
particular port for which it is entered outwards; and if my part
of it is landed without the presence of an officer, not only the
forfeiture of the wool is incurred, as in other goods, but the
usual additional penalty of 3s. for every pound weight is
likewise incurred.

Our woollen manufacturers, in order to justify their demand of
such extraordinary restrictions and regulations, confidently
asserted, that English wool was of a peculiar quality, superior
to that of any other country; that the wool of other countries
could not, without some mixture of it, be wrought up into any
tolerable manufacture; that fine cloth could not be made without
it ; that England, therefore, if the exportation of it could be
totally prevented, could monopolize to herself almost the whole
woollen trade of the world; and thus, having no rivals, could
sell at what price she pleased, and in a short time acquire the
most incredible degree of wealth by the most advantageous balance
of trade. This doctrine, like most other doctrines which are
confidently asserted by any considerable number of people, was,
and still continues to be, most implicitly believed by a much
greater number: by almost all those who are either unacquainted
with the woollen trade, or who have not made particular
inquiries. It is, however, so perfectly false, that English wool
is in any respect necessary for the making of fine cloth, that it
is altogether unfit for it. Fine cloth is made altogether of
Spanish wool. English wool, cannot be even so mixed with Spanish
wool, as to enter into the composition without spoiling and
degrading, in some degree, the fabric of the cloth.

It has been shown in the foregoing part of this work, that the
effect of these regulations has been to depress the price of
English wool, not only below what it naturally would be in the
present times, but very much below what it actually was in the
time of Edward III. The price of Scotch wool, when, in
consequence of the Union, it became subject to the same
regulations, is said to have fallen about one half. It is
observed by the very accurate and intelligent author of the
Memoirs of Wool, the Reverend Mr. John Smith, that the price of
the best English wool in England, is generally below what wool of
a very inferior quality commonly sells for in the market of
Amsterdam. To depress the price of this commodity below what may
be called its natural and proper price, was the avowed purpose of
those regulations ; and there seems to be no doubt of their
having produced the effect that was expected from them.

This reduction of price, it may perhaps be thought, by
discouraging the growing of wool, must have reduced very much the
annual produce of that commodity, though not below what it
formerly was, yet below what, in the present state of things, it
would probably have been, had it, in consequence of an open and
free market, been allowed to rise to the natural and proper
price. I am, however, disposed to believe, that the quantity of
the annual produce cannot have been much, though it may, perhaps,
have been a little affected by these regulations. The growing of
wool is not the chief purpose for which the sheep farmer employs
his industry and stock. He expects his profit, not so much from
the price of the fleece, as from that of the carcase; and the
average or ordinary price of the latter must even, in many cases,
make up to him whatever deficiency there may be in the average or
ordinary price of the former. It has been observed, in the
foregoing part of this work, that 'whatever regulations tend to
sink the price, either of wool or of raw hides, below what it
naturally would be, must, in an improved and cultivated country,
have some tendency to raise the price of butcher's meat. The
price, both of the great and small cattle which are fed on
improved and cultivated land, must be sufficient to pay the rent
which the landlord, and the profit which the farmer, has reason
to expect from improved and cultivated land. If it is not, they
will soon cease to feed them. Whatever part of this price,
therefore, is not paid by the wool and the hide, must be paid by
the carcase. The less there is paid for the one, the more must be
paid for the other. In what manner this price is to be divided
upon the different parts of the beast, is indifferent to the
landlords and farmers, provided it is all paid to them. In an
improved and cultivated country, therefore, their interest as
landlords and farmers cannot be much affected by such
regulations, though their interest as consumers may, by the rise
in the price of provisions.' According to this reasoning,
therefore, this degradation in the price of wool is not likely,
in an improved and cultivated country, to occasion any diminution
in the annual produce of that commodity; except so far as, by
raising the price of mutton, it may somewhat diminish the demand
for, and consequently the production of, that particular species
of butcher's meat, Its effect, however, even in this way, it is
probable, is not very considerable.

But though its effect upon the quantity of the annual produce may
not have been very considerable, its effect upon the quality, it
may perhaps be thought, must necessarily have been very great.
The degradation in the quality of English wool, if not below what
it was in former times, yet below what it naturally would have
been in the present state of improvement and cultivation, must
have been, it may perhaps be supposed, very nearly in proportion
to the degradation of price.     As the quality depends upon the
breed, upon the pasture, and upon the management and cleanliness
of the sheep, during the whole progress of the growth of the
fleece, the attention to these circumstances, it may naturally
enough be imagined, can never be greater than in proportion to
the recompence which the price of the fleece is likely to make
for the labour and expense which that attention requires. It
happens, however, that the goodness of the fleece depends, in a
great measure, upon the health, growth, and bulk of the animal:
the same attention which is necessary for the improvement of the
carcase is, in some respect, sufficient for that of the fleece.
Notwithstanding the degradation of price, English wool is said to
have been improved considerably during the course even of the
present century. The improvement, might, perhaps, have been
greater if the price had been better; but the lowness of price,
though it may have obstructed, yet certainly it has not
altogether prevented that improvement.

The violence of these regulations, therefore, seems to have
affected neither the quantity nor the quality of the annual
produce of wool, so much as it might have been expected to do
(though I think it probable that it may have affected the latter
a good deal more than the former); and the interest of the
growers of wool, though it must have been hurt in some degree,
seems upon the whole, to have been much less hurt than could well
have been imagined.

These considerations, however, will not justify the absolute
prohibition of the exportation of wool ; but they will fully
justify the imposition of a considerable tax upon that
exportation.

To hurt, in any degree, the interest of any one order of
citizens, for no other purpose but to promote that of some other,
is evidently contrary to that justice and equality of treatment
which the sovereign owes to all the different orders of his
subjects. But the prohibition certainly hurts, in some degree,
the interest of the growers of wool, for no other purpose but to
promote that of the manufacturers.

Every different order of citizens is bound to contribute to the
support of the sovereign or commonwealth. A tax of five, or even
of ten shillings, upon the exportation of every tod of wool,
would produce a very considerable revenue to the sovereign. It
would hurt the interest of the growers somewhat less than the
prohibition, because it would not probably lower the price of
wool quite so much. It would afford a sufficient advantage to the
manufacturer, because, though he might not buy his wool
altogether so cheap as under the prohibition, he would still buy
it at least five or ten shillings cheaper than any foreign
manufacturer could buy it, besides saving the freight and
insurance which the other would be obliged to pay. It is scarce
possible to devise a tax which could produce any considerable
revenue to the sovereign, and at the same time occasion so little
inconveniency to anybody.


The prohibition, notwithstanding all the penalties which guard
it, does not prevent the exportation of wool. It is exported, it
is well known. in great quantities. The great difference between
the price in the home and that in the foreign market, presents
such a temptation to smuggling, that all the rigour of the law
cannot prevent it. This illegal exportation is advantageous to
nobody but the smuggler. A legal exportation, subject to a tax,
by affording a revenue to the sovereign, and thereby saving the
imposition of some other, perhaps more burdensome and
inconvenient taxes, might prove advantageous to all the different
subjects of the state.

The exportation of fuller's earth, or fuller's clay, supposed to
be necessary for preparing and cleansing the woollen
manufactures, has been subjected to nearly the same penalties as
the exportation of wool. Even tobacco-pipe clay, though
acknowledged to be different from fuller's clay, yet, on account
of their resemblance, and because fuller's clay might sometimes
be exported as tobacco-pipe clay, has been laid under the same
prohibitions and penalties.

By the 13th and 14th of Charles II. chap, 7, the exportation, not
only of raw hides, but of tanned leather, except in the shape of
boots, shoes, or slippers, was prohibited ; and the law gave a
monopoly to our boot-makers and shoe-makers, not only against our
graziers, but against our tanners. By subsequent statutes, our
tanners have got themselves exempted from this monopoly, upon
paying a small tax of only one shilling on the hundred weight of
tanned leather, weighing one hundred and twelve pounds. They have
obtained likewise the drawback of two-thirds of the excise duties
imposed upon their commodity, even when exported without further
manufacture. All manufactures of leather may be exported duty
free ; and the exporter is besides entitled to the drawback of
the whole duties of excise.     Our graziers still continue
subject to the old monopoly. Graziers, separated from one
another, and dispersed through all the different corners of the
country, cannot, without great difficulty, combine together for
the purpose either of imposing monopolies upon their
fellow-citizens, or of exempting themselves from such as may have
been imposed upon them by other people. Manufacturers of all
kinds, collected together in numerous bodies in all great cities,
easily can. Even the horns of cattle are prohibited to be
exported ; and the two insignificant trades of the horner and
comb-maker enjoy, in this respect, a monopoly against the
graziers.

Restraints, either by prohibitions, or by taxes, upon the
exportation of goods which are partially, but not completely
manufactured, are not peculiar to the manufacture of leather. As
long as anything remains to be done, in order to fit any
commodity for immediate use and consumption, our manufacturers
think that they themselves ought to have the doing of it. Woollen
yarn and worsted are prohibited to be exported, under the same
penalties as wool even white cloths we subject to a duty upon
exportation; and our dyers have so far obtained a monopoly
against our clothiers. Our clothiers would probably have been
able to defend themselves against it; but it happens that the
greater part of our principal clothiers are themselves likewise
dyers. Watch-cases, clock-cases, and dial-plates for clocks and
watches, have been prohibited to be exported. Our clock-makers
and watch-makers are, it seems, unwilling that the price of this
sort of workmanship should be raised upon them by the competition
of foreigners.

By some old statutes of Edward III, Henry VIII. and Edward VI.
the exportation of all metals was prohibited. Lead and tin were
alone excepted, probably on account of the great abundance of
those metals; in the exportation of which a considerable part of
the trade of the kingdom in those days consisted. For the
encouragement of the mining trade, the 5th of William and Mary,
chap.17, exempted from this prohibition iron, copper, and mundic
metal made from British ore. The exportation of all sorts of
copper bars, foreign as well as British, was afterwards permitted
by the 9th and 10th of Willimn III. chap 26. The exportation of
unmanufactured brass, of what is called gun-metal, bell-metal,
and shroff metal, still continues to be prohibited. Brass
manufactures of all sorts may be exported duty free.

The exportation of the materials of manufacture, where it is not
altogether prohibited, is, in many cases, subjected to
considerable duties.

By the 8th Geo. I. chap.15, the exportation of all goods, the
produce of manufacture of Great Britain, upon which any duties
had been imposed by former statutes, was rendered duty free. The
following goods, however, were excepted: alum, lead, lead-ore,
tin, tanned leather, copperas, coals, wool, cards, white woollen
cloths, lapis calaminaris, skins of all sorts, glue, coney hair
or wool, hares wool, hair of all sorts, horses, and litharge of
lead. If you except horses, all these are either materials of
manufacture, or incomplete manufactures (which may be considered
as materials for still further manufacture), or instruments of
trade. This statute leaves them subject to all the old duties
which had ever been imposed upon them, the old subsidy, and one
per cent. outwards.

By the same statute, a great number of foreign drugs for dyers
use are exempted from all duties upon importation. Each of them,
however, is afterwards subjected to a certain duty, not indeed a
very heavy one, upon exportation. Our dyers, it seems, while they
thought it for their interest to encourage the importation of
those drugs, by an exemption from all duties, thought it likewise
for their own interest to throw some small discouragement upon
their exportation. The avidity, however, which suggested this
notable piece of mercantile ingenuity, most probably disappointed
itself of its object. It necessarily taught the importers to be
more careful than they might otherwise have been, that their
importation should not exceed what was necessary for the supply
of the home market. The home market was at all times likely to be
more scantily supplied ; the commodities were at all times likely
to be somewhat dearer there than they would have been, had the
exportation been rendered as free as the importation.

By the above-mentioned statute, gum senega, or gum arabic, being
among the enumerated dyeing drugs, might be imported duty free.
They were subjected, indeed, to a small poundage duty, amounting
only to threepence in the hundred weight, upon their
re-exportation. France enjoyed, at that time, an exclusive trade
to the country most productive of those drugs, that which lies in
the neighbourhood of the Senegal ; and the British market could
not be easily supplied by the immediate importation of them from
the place of growth. By the 25th Geo. II. therefore, gum senega
was allowed to be imported (contrary to the general dispositions
of the act of navigation) from any part of Europe. As the law,
however, did not mean to encourage this species of trade, so
contrary to the general principles of the mercantile policy of
England, it imposed a duty of ten shillings the hundred weight
upon such importation, and no part of this duty was to be
afterwards drawn back upon its exportation. The successful war
which began in 1755 gave Great Britain the same exclusive trade
to those countries which France had enjoyed before. Our
manufactures, as soon as the peace was made, endeavoured to avail
themselves of this advantage, and to establish a monopoly in
their own favour both against the growers and against the
importers of this comnmdity. By the 5th of Geo. III. therefore,
chap. 37, the exportation of gum senega, from his majesty's
dominions in Africa, was confined to Great Britain, and was
subjected to all the same restrictions, regulations, forfeitures,
and penalties, as that of the enumerated commodities of the
British colonies in America and the West Indies. Its importation,
indeed, was subjected to a small duty of sixpence the hundred
weight; but its re-exportation was subjected to the enormous duty
of one pound ten shillings the hundred weight. It was the
intention of our manufacturers, that the whole produce of those
countries should be imported into Great Britain; and in order
that they themselves might he enabled to buy it at their own
price, that no part of it should be exported again, but at such
an expense as would sufficiently discourage that exportation.
Their avidity, however, upon this, as well as upon many other
occasions, disappointed itself of its object. This enormous duty
presented such a temptation to smuggling, that great quantities
of this commodity were clandestinely exported, probably to all
the manufacturing countries of Europe, but particularly to
Holland, not only from Great Britain, but from Afrira. Upon this
account, by the 14th Geo. III. chap.10, this duty upon
exportation was reduced to five shillings the hundred weight.

In the book of rates, according to which the old subsidy was
levied, beaver skins were estimated at six shillings and eight
pence a piece; and the different subsidies and imposts which,
before the year 1722, had been laid upon their importation,
amounted to one-fifth part of the rate, or to sixteen pence upon
each skin; all of which, except half the old subsidy, amounting
only to twopence, was drawn back upon exportation. This duty,
upon the importation of so important a material of manufacture,
had been thought too high; and, in the year 1722, the rate was
reduced to two shillings and sixpence, which reduced the duty
upon importation to sixpence, and of this only one-half was to be
drawn back upon exportation. The same successful war put the
country most productive of beaver under the dominion of Great
Britain ; and beaver skins being among the enumerated
commodities, the exportation from America was consequently
confined to the market of Great Britain. Our manufacturers soon
bethought themselves of the advantage which they might make of
this circumstance; and in the year 1764, the duty upon the
importation of beaver skin was reduced to one penny, but the duty
upon exportation was raised to sevenpence each skin, without any
drawback of the duty upon importation. By the same law, a duty of
eighteen pence the pound was imposed upon the exportation of
beaver wool or woumbs, without making any alteration in the duty
upon the importation of that commodity, which, when imported by
British, and in British shipping, amounted at that time to
between fourpence and fivepence the piece.

Coals may be considered both as a material of manufacture, and as
an instrument of trade. Heavy duties, accordingly, have been
imposed upon their exportation, amounting at present (1783) to
more than five shillings the ton, or more than fifteen shillings
the chaldron, Newcastle measure ; which is, in most cases, more
than the original value of the commodity at the coal-pit, or even
at the shipping port for exportation.

The exportation, however, of the instruments of trade, properly
so called, is commonly restrained, not by high duties, but by
absolute prohibitions. Thus, by the 7th and 8th of William III
chap.20, sect.8, the exportation of frames or engines for
knitting gloves or stockings, is prohibited, under the penalty,
not only of the forfeiture of such frames or engines, so
exported, or attempted to be exported, but of forty pounds, one
half to the king, the other to the person who shall inform or sue
for the same. In the same manner, by the 14th Geo. III. chap. 71,
the exportation to foreign parts, of any utensils made use of in
the cotton, linen, woollen, and silk manufactures, is prohibited
under the penalty, not only of the forfeiture of such utensils,
but of two hundred pounds, to be paid by the person who shall
offend in this manner ; and likewise of two hundred pounds, to be
paid by the master of the ship, who shall knowingly suffer such
utensils to be loaded on board his ship.

When such heavy penalties were imposed upon the exportation of
the dead instruments of trade, it could not well be expected that
the living instrument, the artificer, should be allowed to go
free. Accordingly, by the 5th Geo. I. chap. 27, the person who
shall be convicted of enticing any artificer, of or in any of the
manufactures of Great Britain, to go into any foreign parts, in
order to practise or teach his trade, is liable, for the first
offence, to be fined in any sum not exceeding one hundred pounds,
and to three months imprisomnent, and until the fine shall be
paid ; and for the second offence, to be fined in any sum, at the
discretion of the court, and to imprisonment for twelve months,
and until the fine shall be paid. By the 23d Geo. II. chap. 13,
this penalty is increased, for the first offence, to five hundred
pounds for every artificer so enticed, and to twelve months
imprisonment, and until the fine shall be paid ; and for the
second offence, to one thousand pounds, and to two years
imprisonment, and until the fine shall be paid.

By the former of these two statutes, upon proof that any person
has been enticing any artificer, or that any artificer has
promised or contracted to go into foreign parts, for the purposes
aforesaid, such artificer may be obliged to give security, at the
discretion of the court, that he shall not go beyond the seas,
and may be committed to prison until he give such security.

If any artificer has gone beyond the seas, and is exercising or
teaching his trade in any foreign country, upon warning being
given to him by any of his majesty's ministers or consuls abroad,
or by one of his majesty's secretaries of state, for the time
being, if he does not, within six months after such warning,
return into this realm, and from henceforth abide and inhabit
continually within the same, he is from thenceforth declared
incapable of taking any legacy devised to him within this
kingdom, or of being executor or administrator to any person, or
of taking any lands within this kingdom, by descent, devise, or
purchase. He likewise forfeits to the king all his lands, goods,
and chattels; is declared an alien in every respect; and is put
out of the king's protection.

It is unnecessary, I imagine, to observe how contrary such
regulations are to the boasted liberty of the subject, of which
we affect to be so very jealous ; but which, in this case, is so
plainly sacrificed to the futile interests of our merchants and
manufacturers.

The laudable motive of all these regulations, is to extend our
own manufactures, not by their own improvement, but by the
depression of those of all our neighbours, and by putting an end,
as much as possible, to the troublesome competition of such
odious and disagreeable rivals. Our master manufacturers think it
reasonable that they themselves should have the monopoly of the
ingenuity of all their countrymen. Though by restraining, in some
trades, the number of apprentices which can be employed at one
time, and by imposing the necessity of a long apprenticeship in
all trades, they endeavour, all of them, to confine the knowledge
of their respective employments to as small a number as possible
; they are unwilling, however, that any part of this small number
should go abroad to instruct foreigners.

Consumption is the sole end and purpose of all production ; and
the interest of the producer ought to be attended to, only so far
as it may be necessary for promoting that of the consumer.

The maxim is so perfectly self-evident, that it would be absurd
to attempt to prove it. But in the mercantile system, the
interest of the consumer is almost constantly sacrificed to that
of the producer ; and it seems to consider production, and not
consumption, as the ultimate end and object of all industry and
commerce.

In the restraints upon the importation of all foreign commodities
which can come into competition with those of our own growth or
manufacture, the interest of the home consumer is evidently
sacrificed to that of the producer. It is altogether for the
benefit of the latter, that the former is obliged to pay that
enhancement of price which this monopoly almost always occasions.

It is altogether for the benefit of the producer, that bounties
are granted upon the exportation of some of his productions. The
home consumer is obliged to pay, first the tax which is necessary
for paying the bounty ; and, secondly, the still greater tax
which necessarily arises from the enhancement of the price of the
commodity in the home market.

By the famous treaty of commerce with Portugal, the consumer is
prevented by duties from purchasing of a neighbouring country, a
commodity which our own climate does not produce ; but is obliged
to purchase it of a distant country, though it is acknowledged,
that the commodity of the distant country is of a worse quality
than that of the near one. The home consumer is obliged to submit
to this inconvenience, in order that the producer may import into
the distant country some of his productions, upon more
advantageous terms than he otherwise would have been allowed to
do. The consumer, too, is obliged to pay whatever enhancement in
the price of those very productions this forced exportation may
occasion in the home market.

But in the system of laws which has been established for the
management of our American and West Indian colonies, the interest
of the home consumer has been sacrificed to that of the producer,
with a more extravagant profusion than in all our other
commercial regulations. A great empire has been established for
the sole purpose of raising up a nation of customers, who should
be obliged to buy, from the shops of our different producers, all
the goods with which these could supply them. For the sake of
that little enhancement of price which this monopoly might afford
our producers, the home consumers have been burdened with the
whole expense of maintaining and defending that empire. For this
purpose, and for this purpose only, in the two last wars, more
than two hundred millions have been spent, and a new debt of more
than a hundred and seventy millions has been contracted, over and
above all that had been expended for the same purpose in former
wars.     The interest of this debt alone is not only greater
than the whole extraordinary profit which, it never could be
pretended, was made by the monopoly of the colony trade, but than
the whole value of that trade, or than the whole value of the
goods which, at an average, have been annually exported to the
colonies.

It cannot be very difficult to determine who have been the
contrivers of this whole mercantile system; not the consumers, we
may believe, whose interest has been entirely neglected; but the
producers, whose interest has been so carefully attended to ; and
among this latter class, our merchants and manufacturers have
been by far the principal architects. In the mercantile
regulations which have been taken notice of in this chapter, the
interest of our manufacturers has been most peculiarly attended
to; and the interest, not so much of the consumers, as that of
some other sets of producers, has been sacrificed to it.





CHAPTER    IX.

OF THE AGRICULTURAL SYSTEMS, OR OF THOSE SYSTEMS OF POLITICAL
ECONOMY WHICH REPRESENT THE PRODUCE OF LAND, AS EITHER THE SOLE
OR THE PRINCIPAL SOURCE OF THE REVENUE AND WEALTH OF EVERY
COUNTRY.

The agricultural systems of political economy will not require so
long an explanation as that which I have thought it necessary to
bestow upon the mercantile or commercial system.

That system which represents the produce of land as the sole
source of the revenue and wealth of every country, has so far as
I know, never been adopted by any nation, and it at present
exists only in the speculations of a few men of great learning
and ingenuity in France. It would not, surely, be worth while to
examine at great length the errors of a system which never has
done, and probably never will do, any harm in any part of the
world. I shall endeavour to explain, however, as distinctly as I
can, the great outlines of this very ingenious system.

Mr. Colbert, the famous minister of Lewis XIV. was a man of
probity, of great industry, and knowledge of detail ; of great
experience and acuteness in the examination of public accounts;
and of abilities, in short, every way fitted for introducing
method and good order into the collection and expendture of the
public revenue. That minister had unfortunately embraced all the
prejudices of the mercantile system, in its nature and essence a
system of restraint and regulation, and such as could scarce fail
to be agreeable to a laborious and plodding man of business, who
had been accustomed to regulate the different departments of
public offices, and to establish the necessary checks and
controlls for confining each to its proper sphere. The industry
and commerce of a great country, he endeavoured to regulate upon
the same model as the departments of a public office ; and
instead of allowing every man to pursue his own interest his own
way, upon the liberal plan of equality, liberty, and justice, he
bestowed upon certain branches of industry extraordinary
privileges, while he laid others under as extraordinary
restraints. He was not only disposed, like other European
ministers, to encourage more the industry of the towns than that
of the country; but, in order to support the industry of the
towns, he was willing even to depress and keep down that of the
country. In order to render provisions cheap to the inhabitants
of the towns, and thereby to encourage manufactures and foreign
commerce, he prohibited altogether the exportation of corn, and
thus excluded the inhabitants of the country from every foreign
market, for by far the most important part of the produce of
their industry. This prohibition, joined to the restraints
imposed by the ancient provincial laws of France upon the
transportation of corn from one province to another, and to the
arbitrary and degading taxes which are levied upon the
cultivators in almost all the provinces, discouraged and kept
down the agriculture of that country very much below the state to
which it would naturally have risen in so very fertile a soil,
and so very happy a climate. This state of discouragement and
depression was felt more or less in every different part of the
country, and many different inquiries were set on foot concerning
the causes of it. One of those causes appeared to be the
preference given, by the institutions of Mr. Colbert, to the
industry of the towns above that of the country.

If the rod be bent too much one way, says the proverb, in order
to make it straight, you must bend it as much the other. The
French philosophers, who have proposed the system which
represents agriculture as the sole source of the revenue and
wealth of every country, seem to have adopted this proverbial
maxim; and, as in the plan of Mr. Colbert, the industry of the
towns was certainly overvalued in comparison with that of the
country, so in their system it seems to be as certainly
under-valued.

The different orders of people, who have ever been supposed to
contribute in any respect towards the annual produce of the land
and labour of the country, they divide into three classes. The
first is the class of the proprietors of land. The second is the
class of the cultivators, of farmers and country labourers, whom
they honour with the peculiar appellation of the productive
class. The third is the class of artificers, manufacturers, and
merchants, whom they endeavour to degrade by the humiliating
appellation of the barren or unproductive class.

The class of proprietors contributes to the annual produce, by
the expense which they may occasionally lay out upon the
improvement of the land, upon the buildings, drains, inclosures,
and other ameliorations, which they may either make or maintain
upon it, and by means of which the cultivators are enabled, with
the same capital, to raise a greater produce, and consequently to
pay a greater rent. This advanced rent may be considered as the
interest or profit due to the proprietor, upon the expense or
capital which be thus employs in the improvement of his land.
Such expenses are in this system called ground expenses (depenses
foncieres).

The cultivators or farmers contribute to the annual produce, by
what are in this system called the original and annual expenses
(depenses primitives, et depenses annuelles), which they lay out
upon the cultivation of the land. The original expenses consist
in the instruments of husbandry, in the stock of cattle, in the
seed, and in the maintenance of the farmer's family, servants,
and cattle, during at least a great part of the first year of his
occupancy, or till he can receive some return from the land. The
annual expenses consist in the seed, in the wear and tear of
instruments of husbandry, and in the annual maintenance of the
farmer's servants and cattle, and of his family too, so far as
any part of them can be considered as servants employed in
cultivation. That part of the produce of the land which remains
to him after paying the rent, ought to be sufficient, first, to
replace to him, within a reasonable time, at least during the
term of his occupancy, the whole of his original expenses,
together with the ordinary profits of stock; and, secondly, to
replace to him annually the whole of his annual expenses,
together likewise with the ordinary profits of stock. Those two
sorts of expenses are two capitals which the farmer employs in
cultivation; and unless they are regularly restored to him,
together with a reasonable profit, he cannot carry on his
employment upon a level with other employments; but, from a
regard to his own interest, must desert it as soon as possible,
and seek some other. That part of the produce of the land which
is thus necessary for enabling the farmer to continue his
business, ought to be considered as a fund sacred to cultivation,
which, if the landlord violates, he necessarily reduces the
produce of his own land, and, in a few years, not only disables
the farmer from paying this racked rent, but from paying the
reasonable rent which he might otherwise have got for his land.
The rent which properly belongs to the landlord, is no more than
the neat produce which remains after paying, in the completest
manner, all the necessary expenses which must be previously laid
out, in order to raise the gross or the whole produce. It is
because the labour of the cultivators, over and above paying
completely all those necessary expenses, affords a neat produce
of this kind, that this class of people are in this system
peculiarly distinguished by the honourable appellation of the
productive class. Their original and annual expenses are for the
same reason called, In this system, productive expenses, because,
over and above replacing their own value, they occasion the
annual reproduction of this neat produce.

The ground expenses, as they are called, or what the landlord
lays out upon the improvement of his land, are, in this system,
too, honoured with the appellation of productive expenses. Till
the whole of those expenses, together with the ordinary profits
of stock, have been completely repaid to him by the advanced rent
which he gets from his land, that advanced rent ought to be
regarded as sacred and inviolable, both by the church and by the
king ; ought to be subject neither to tithe nor to taxation. If
it is otherwise, by discouraging the improvement of land, the
church discourages the future increase of her own tithes, and the
king the future increase of his own taxes. As in a well ordered
state of things, therefore, those ground expenses, over and above
reproducing in the completest manner their own value, occasion
likewise, after a certain time, a reproduction of a neat produce,
they are in this system considered as productive expenses.

The ground expenses of the landlord, however, together with the
original and the annual expenses of the farmer, are the only
three sorts of expenses which in this system are considered as
productive. All other expenses, and all other orders of people,
even those who, in the common apprehensions of men, are regarded
as the most productive, are, in this account of things,
represented as altogether barren and unproductive.

Artificers and manufacturers, in particular, whose industry, in
the common apprehensions of men, increases so much the value of
the rude produce of land, are in this system represented as a
class of people altogether barren and unproductive. Their labour,
it is said, replaces only the stock which employs them, together
with its ordinary profits. That stock consists in the materials,
tools, and wages, advanced to them by their employer; and is the
fund destined for their employment and maintenance. Its profits
are the fund destined for the maintenance of their employer.
Their employer, as he advances to them the stock of materials,
tools, and wages, necessary for their employment, so he advances
to himself what is necessary for his own maintenance; and this
maintenance he generally proportions to the profit which he
expects to make by the price of their work. Unless its price
repays to him the maintenance which he advances to himself, as
well as the materials, tools, and wages, which he advances to his
workmen, it evidently does not repay to him the whole expense
which he lays out upon it. The profits of manufacturing stock,
therefore, are not, like the rent of land, a neat produce which
remains after completely repaying the whole expense which must be
laid out in order to obtain them. The stock of the farmer yields
him a profit, as well as that of the master manufacturer; and it
yields a rent likewise to another person, which that of the
master manufacturer does not. The expense, therefore, laid out in
employing and maintaining artificers and manufacturers, does no
more than continue, if one may say so, the existence of its own
value, and does not produce any new value. It is, therefore,
altogether a barren and unproductive expense. The expense, on the
contrary, laid out in employing farmers and country labourers,
over and above continuing the existence of its own value,
produces a new value the rent of the landlord. It is, therefore,
a productive expense.

Mercantile stock is equally barren and unproductive with
manufacturing stock. It only continues the existence of its own
value, without producing any new value. Its profits are only the
repayment of the maintenance which its employer advances to
himself during the time that he employs it, or till he receives
the returns of it. They are only the repayment of a part of the
expense which must be laid out in employing it.

The labour of artificers and manufacturers never adds any thing
to the value of the whole annual amount of the rude produce of
the land. It adds, indeed, greatly to the value of some
particular parts of it. But the consumption which, in the mean
time, it occasions of other parts, is precisely equal to the
value which it adds to those parts; so that the value of the
whole amount is not, at any one moment of time, in the least
augmented by it. The person who works the lace of a pair of fine
ruffles for example, will sometimes raise the value of, perhaps,
a pennyworth of flax to 30 sterling. But though, at first sight,
he appears thereby to multiply the value of a part of the rude
produce about seven thousand and two hundred times, he in reality
adds nothing to the value of the whole annual amount of the rude
produce. The working of that lace costs him, perhaps, two years
labour. The 30 which he gets for it when it is finished, is no
more than the repayment of the subsistence which he advances to
himself during the two years that he is employed about it. The
value which, by every day's, month's, or year's labour, he adds
to the flax, does no more than replace the value of his own
consumption during that day, month, or year. At no moment of
time, therefore, does he add any thing to the value of the whole
annual amount of the rude produce of the land : the portion of
that produce which he is continually consuming, being always
equal to the value which he is continually producing. The extreme
poverty of the greater part of the persons employed in this
expensive, though trifling manufacture, may satisfy us that the
price of their work does not, in ordinary cases, exceed the value
of their subsistence. It is otherwise with the work of farmers
and country labourers. The rent of the landlord is a value which,
in ordinary cases, it is continually producing over and above
replacing, in the most complete manner, the whole consumption,
the whole expense laid out upon the employment and maintenance
both of the workmen and of their employer.

Artificers, manufacturers, and merchants, can augment the revenue
and wealth of their society by parsimony only ; or, as it is
expressed in this system, by privation, that is, by depriving
themselves of a part of the funds destined for their own
subsistence.     They annually reproduce nothing but those funds.
Unless, therefore, they annually save some part of them, unless
they annually deprive themselves of the enjoyment of some part of
them, the revenue and wealth of their society can never be, in
the smallest degree, augmented by means of their industry.
Farmers and country labourers, on the contrary, may enjoy
completely the whole funds destined for their own subsistence,
and yet augment, at the same time, the revenue and wealth of
their society. Over and above what is destined for their own
subsistence, their industry annually affords a neat produce, of
which the augmentation necessarily augments the revenue and
wealth of their society. Nations, therefore, which, like France
or England, consist in a great measure, of proprietors and
cultivators, can be enriched by industry and enjoyment.
Nations, on the contrary, which, like Holland and Hamburgh, are
composed chiefly of merchants, artificers, and manufacturers, can
grow rich only through parsimony and privation. As the interest
of nations so differently circumstanced is very different, so is
likewise the common character of the people. In those of the
former kind, liberality, frankness, and good fellowship,
naturally make a part of their common character ; in the latter,
narrowness, meanness, and a selfish disposition, averse to all
social pleasure and enjoyment.

The unproductive class, that of merchants, artificers, and
manufacturers, is maintained and employed altogether at the
expense of the two other classes, of that of proprietors, and of
that of cultivators. They furnish it both with the materials of
its work, and with the fund of its subsistence, with the corn and
cattle which it consumes while it is employed about that work.
The proprietors and cultivators finally pay both the wages of all
the workmen of the unproductive class, and the profits of all
their employers. Those workmen and their employers are properly
the servants of the proprietors and cultivators. They are only
servants who work without doors, as menial servants work within.
Both the one and the other, however, are equally maintained at
the expense of the same masters. The labour of both is equally
unproductive. It adds nothing to the value of the sum total of
the rude produce of the land. Instead of increasing the value of
that sum total, it is a charge and expense which must be paid out
of it.

The unproductive class, however, is not only useful, but greatly
useful, to the other two classes. By means of the industry of
merchants, artificers, and manufacturers, the proprietors and
cultivators can purchase both the foreign goods and the
manufactured produce of their own country, which they have
occasion for, with the produce of a much smaller quantity of
their own labour, than what they would be obliged to employ, if
they were to attempt, in an awkward and unskilful manner, either
to import the one, or to make the other, for their own use. By
means of the unproductive class, the cuitivators are delivered
from many cares, which would otherwise distract their attention
from the cultivation of land. The superiority of produce, which
in consequence of this undivided attention, they are enabled to
raise, is fully sufficient to pay the whole expense which the
maintenance and employment of the unproductive class costs either
the proprietors or themselves. The industry of merchants,
artificers, and manufacturers, though in its own nature
altogether unproductive, yet contributes in this manner
indirectly to increase the produce of the land. It increases the
productive powers of productive labour, by leaving it at liberty
to confine itself to its proper employment, the cultivation of
land ; and the plough goes frequently the easier and the better,
by means of the labour of the man whose business is most remote
from the plough.

It can never be the interest of the proprietors and cultivators,
to restrain or to discourage, in any respect, the industry of
merchants, artificers, and manufacturers. The greater the liberty
which this unproductive class enjoys, the greater will be the
competition in all the different trades which compose it, and the
cheaper will the other two classes be supplied, both with foreign
goods and with the manufactured produce of their own country.

It can never be the interest of the unproductive class to oppress
the other two classes. It is the surplus produce of the land, or
what remains after deducting the maintenance, first of the
cultivators, and afterwards of the proprietors, that maintains
and employs the unproductive class. The greater this surplus, the
greater must likewise be the maintenance and employment of that
class. The establishment of perfect justice, of perfect liberty,
and of perfect equality, is the very simple secret which most
effectually secures the highest degree of prosperity to all the
three classes.

The merchants, artificers, and manufacturers of those mercantile
states, which, like Holland and Hamburgh, consist chiefly of this
unproductive class, are in the same manner maintained and
employed altogether at the expense of the proprietors and
cultivators of land. The only difference is, that those
proprietors and cultivators are, the greater part of them, placed
at a most inconvenient distance from the merchants, artificers,
and manufacturers, whom they supply with the materials of their
work and the fund of their subsistence; are the inhabitants of
other countries, and the subjects of other governments.

Such mercantile states, however, are not only useful, but greatly
useful, to the inhabitants of those other countries. They fill
up, in some measure, a very important void ; and supply the place
of the merchants, artificers, and manufacturers, whom the
inhabitants of those countries ought to find at home, but whom,
from some defect in their policy, they do not find at home.

It can never be the interest of those landed nations, if I may
call them so, to discourage or distress the industry of such
mercantile states, by imposing high duties upon their trade, or
upon the commodities which they furnish.     Such duties, by
rendering those commodities dearer, could serve only to sink the
real value of the surplus produce of their own land, with which,
or, what comes to the same thing, with the price of which those
commodities are purchased.     Such duties could only serve to
discourage the increase of that surplus produce, and consequently
the improvement and cultivation of their own land. The most
effectual expedient, on the contrary, for raising the value of
that surplus produce, for encouraging its increase, and
consequently the improvement and cultivation of their own land,
would be to allow the most perfect freedom to the trade of all
such mercantile nations.

This perfect freedom of trade would even be the most effectual
expedient for supplying them, in due time, with all the
artificers, manufacturers, and merchants, whom they wanted at
home; and for filling up, in the properest and most advantageous
manner, that very important void which they felt there.

The continual increase of the surplus produce of their land
would, in due time, create a greater capital than what would be
employed with the ordinary rate of profit in the improvement and
cultivation of land; and the surplus part of it would naturally
turn itself to the employment of artificers and manufacturers, at
home. But these artificers and manufacturers, finding at home
both the materials of their work and the fund of their
subsistence, might immediately, even with much less art and skill
be able to work as cheap as the little artificers and
manufacturers of such mercantile states, who had both to bring
from a greater distance. Even though, from want of art and skill,
they might not for some time be able to work as cheap, yet,
finding a market at home, they might be able to sell their work
there as cheap as that of the artificers and manufacturers of
such mercantile states. which could not be brought to that market
but from so great a distance ; and as their art and skill
improved, they would soon be able to sell it cheaper. The
artificers and manufacturers of such mercantile states,
therefore, would immediately be rivalled in the market of those
landed nations, and soon after undersold and justled out of it
altogether. The cheapness of the manufactures of those landed
nations, in consequence of the gradual improvements of art and
skill, would, in due time, extend their sale beyond the home
market, and carry them to many foreign markets, from which they
would, in the same manner, gradually justle out many of the
manufacturers of such mercantile nations.

This continual increase, both of the rude and manufactured
produce of those landed nations, would, in due time, create a
greater capital than could, with the ordinary rate of profit, be
employed either in agriculture or in manufactures. The surplus of
this capital would naturally turn itself to foreign trade and be
employed in exporting, to foreign countries, such parts of the
rude and manufactured produce of its own country, as exceeded the
demand of the home market. In the exportation of the produce of
their own country, the merchants of a landed nation would have an
advantage of the same kind over those of mercantile nations,
which its artificers and manufacturers had over the artificers
and manufacturers of such nations; the advantage of finding at
home that cargo, and those stores and provisions, which the
others were obliged to seek for at a distance. With inferior art
and skill in navigation, therefore, they would be able to sell
that cargo as cheap in foreign markets as the merchants of such
mercantile nations; and with equal art and skill they would be
able to sell it cheaper. They would soon, therefore, rival those
mercantile nations in this branch of foreign trade, and, in due
time, would justle them out of it altogether.

According to this liberal and generous system, therefore, the
most advantageous method in which a landed nation can raise up
artificers, manufacturers, and merchants of its own, is to grant
the most perfect freedom of trade to the artificers,
manufacturers, and merchants of all other nations. It thereby
raises the value of the surplus produce of its own land, of which
the continual increase gradually establishes a fund, which, in
due time, necessarily raises up all the artificers,
manufacturers, and merchants, whom it has occasion for.

When a landed nation on the contrary, oppresses, either by high
duties or by prohibitions, the trade of foreign nations, it
necessarily hurts its own interest in two different ways. First,
by raising the price of all foreign goods, and of all sorts of
manufactures, it necessarily sinks the real value of the surplus
produce of its own land, with which, or, what comes to the same
thing, with the price of which, it purchases those foreign goods
and manufactures. Secondly, by giving a sort of monopoly of the
home market to its own merchants, artificers, and manufacturers,
it raises the rate of mercantile and manufacturing profit, in
proportion to that of agricultural profit; and, consequently,
either draws from agriculture a part of the capital which had
before been employed in it, or hinders from going to it a part of
what would otherwise have gone to it. This policy, therefore,
discourages agriculture in two different ways; first, by sinking
the real value of its produce, and thereby lowering the rate of
its profits; and, secondly, by raising the rate of profit in all
other employments. Agriculture is rendered less advantageous, and
trade and manufactures more advantageous, than they otherwise
would be; and every man is tempted by his own interest to turn,
as much as he can, both his capital and his industry from the
former to the latter employments.

Though, by this oppressive policy, a landed nation should be able
to raise up artificers, manufacturers, and merchants of its own,
somewhat sooner than it could do by the freedom of trade; a
matter, however, which is not a little doubtful ; yet it would
raise them up, if one may say so, prematurely, and before it was
perfectly ripe for them. By raising up too hastily one species of
industry, it would depress another more valuable species of
industry. By raising up too hastily a species of industry which
duly replaces the stock which employs it, together with the
ordinary profit, it would depress a species of industry which,
over and above replacing that stock, with its profit, affords
likewise a neat produce, a free rent to the landlord. It would
depress productive labour, by encouraging too hastily that labour
which is altogether barren and unproductive.

In what manner, according to this system, the sum total of the
annual produce of the land is distributed among the three classes
above mentioned, and in what manner the labour of the
unproductive class does no more than replace the value of its own
consumption, without increasing in any respect the value of that
sum total, is represented by Mr Quesnai, the very ingenious and
profound author of this system, in some arithmetical formularies.
The first of these formularies, which, by way of eminence, he
peculiarly distinguishes by the name of the Economical Table,
represents the manner in which he supposes this distribution
takes place, in a state of the most perfect liberty, and,
therefore, of the highest prosperity; in a state where the annual
produce is such as to afford the greatest possible neat produce,
and where each class enjoys its proper share of the whole annual
produce. Some subsequent formularies represent the manner in
which he supposes this distribution is made in different states
of restraint and regulation ; in which, either the class of
proprietors, or the barren and unproductive class, is more
favoured than the class of cultivators ; and in which either the
one or the other encroaches, more or less, upon the share which
ought properly to belong to this productive class. Every such
encroachment, every violation of that natural distribution, which
the most perfect liberty would establish, must, according to this
system, necessarily degrade, more or less, from one year to
another, the value and sum total of the annual produce, and must
necessarily occasion a gradual declension in the real wealth and
revenue of the society ; a declension, of which the progress must
be quicker or slower, according to the degree of this
encroachment, according as that natural distribution, which the
most perfect liberty would establish, is more or less violated.
Those subsequent formularies represent the different degrees of
declension which, according to this system, correspond to the
different degrees in which this natural distribution of things is
violated.

Some speculative physicians seem to have imagined that the health
of the human body could be preserved only by a certain precise
regimen of diet and exercise, of which every, the smallest
violation, necessarily occasioned some degree of disease or
disorder proportionate to the degree of the violation.
Experience, however, would seem to shew, that the human body
frequently preserves, to all appearance at least, the most
perfect state of health under a vast variety of different
regimens; even under some which are generally believed to be very
far from being perfectly wholesome. But the healthful state of
the human body, it would seem, contains in itself some unknown
principle of preservation, capable either of preventing or of
correcting, in many respects, the bad effects even of a very
faulty regimen. Mr Quesnai, who was himself a physician, and a
very speculative physician, seems to have entertained a notion of
the same kind concerning the political body, and to have imagined
that it would thrive and prosper only under a certain precise
regimen, the exact regimen of perfect liberty and perfect
justice. He seems not to have considered, that in the political
body, the natural effort which every man is continually making to
better his own condition, is a principle of preservation capable
of preventing and correcting, in many respects, the bad effects
of a political economy, in some degree both partial and
oppressive. Such a political economy, though it no doubt retards
more or less, is not always capable of stopping altogether, the
natural progress of a nation towards wealth and prosperity, and
still less of making it go backwards. If a nation could not
prosper without the enjoyment of perfect liberty and perfect
justice, there is not in the world a nation which could ever have
prospered. In the political body, however, the wisdom of nature
has fortunately made ample provision for remedying many of the
bad effects of the folly and injustice of man ; it the same
manner as it has done in the natural body, for remedying those of
his sloth and intemperance.

The capital error of this system, however, seems to lie in its
representing the class of artificers, manufacturers, and
merchants, as altogether barren and unproductive. The following
observations may serve to shew the impropriety of this
representation : 

First,    this class, it is acknowledged, reproduces annually the
value of its own annual consmnption, and continues, at least, the
existence of the stock or capital which maintains and employs it.
But, upon this account alone, the denomination of barren or
unproductive should seem to be very improperly applied to it. We
should not call a marriage barren or unproductive, though it
produced only a son and a daughter, to replace the father and
mother, and though it did not increase the number of the human
species, but only continued it as it was before. Farmers and
country labourers, indeed, over and above the stock which
maintains and employs them, reproduce annually a neat produce, a
free rent to the landlord. As a marriage which affords three
children is certainly more productive than one which affords only
two, so the labour of farmers and country labourers is certainly
more productive than that of merchants, artificers, and
manufacturers. The superior produce of the one class, however,
does not, render the other barren or unproductive.

Secondly,    it seems, on this account, altogether improper to
consider artificers, manufacturers, and merchants, in the same
light as menial servants. The labour of menial servants does not
continue the existence of the fund which maintains and employs
them. Their maintenance and employment is altogether at the
expense of their masters, and the work which they perform is not
of a nature to repay that expense. That work consists in services
which perish generally in the very instant of their performance,
and does not fix or realize itself in any vendible commodity,
which can replace the value of their wages and maintenance. The
labour, on the contrary, of artificers, manufacturers, and
merchants, naturally does fix and realize itself in some such
vendible commodity. It is upon this account that, in the chapter
in which I treat of productive and unproductive labour, I have
classed artificers, manufacturers, and merchants among the
productive labourers, and menial servants among the barren or
unproductive.

Thirdly,      it seems, upon every supposition, improper to say,
that the labour of artificers, manufacturers, and merchants, does
not increase the real revenue of the society. Though we should
suppose, for example, as it seems to be supposed in this system,
that the value of the daily, monthly, and yearly consumption of
this class was exactly equal to that of its daily, monthly, and
yearly production; yet it would not from thence follow, that its
labour added nothing to the real revenue, to the real value of
the annual produce of the land and labour of the society. An
artificer, for example, who, in the first six months after
harvest, executes ten pounds worth of work, though he should, in
the same time, consume ten pounds worth of corn and other
necessaries, yet really adds the value of ten pounds to the
annual produce of the land and labour of the society. While he
has been consuming a half-yearly revenue of ten pounds worth of
corn and other necessaries, he has produced an equal value of
work, capable of purchasing, either to himself, or to some other
person, an equal half-yearly revenue. The value, therefore, of
what has been consumed and produced during these six months, is
equal, not to ten, but to twenty pounds. It is possible, indeed,
that no more than ten pounds worth of this value may ever have
existed at any one moment of time. But if the ten pounds worth of
corn and other necessaries which were consumed by the artificer,
had been consumed by a soldier, or by a menial servant, the value
of that part of the annual produce which existed at the end of
the six months, would have been ten pounds less than it actually
is in consequence of the labour of the artificer. Though the
value of what the artificer produces, therefore, should not, at
any one moment of time, be supposed greater than the value he
consumes, yet, at every moment of time, the actually existing
value of goods in the market is, in consequence of what he
produces, greater than it otherwise would be.

When the patrons of this system assert, that the consumption of
artificers, manufacturer's, and merchants, is equal to the value
of what they produce, they probably mean no more than that their
revenue, or the fund destined for their consumption, is equal to
it. But if they had expressed themselves more accurately, and
only asserted, that the revenue of this class was equal to the
value of what they produced, it might readily have occurred to
the reader, that what would naturally be saved out of this
revenue, must necessarily increase more or less the real wealth
of the society. In order, therefore, to make out something like
an argument, it was necessary that they should express themselves
as they have done ; and this argument, even supposing things
actually were as it seems to presume them to be, turns out to be
a very inconclusive one.

Fourthly,     farmers and country labourers can no more augment,
without parsimony, the real revenue, the annual produce of the
land and labour of their society, than artificers, manufacturers,
and merchants. The annual produce of the land and labour of any
society can be augmented only in two ways ; either, first, by
some improvement in the productive powers of the useful labour
actually maintained within it; or, secondly, by some increase in
the quantity of that labour.

The improvement in the productive powers of useful labour
depends, first, upon the improvement in the ability of the
workman; and, secondly, upon that of the machinery with which be
works. But the labour of artificers and manufacturers, as it is
capable of being more subdivided, and the labour of each workman
reduced to a greater simplicity of operation, than that of
farmers and country labourers; so it is likewise capable of both
these sorts of improvement in a much higher degree {See book i
chap. 1.} In this respect, therefore, the class of cultivators
can have no sort of advantage over that of artificers and
manufacturers.

The increase in the quantity of useful labour actually employed
within any society must depend altogether upon the increase of
the capital which employs it ; and the increase of that capital,
again, must be exactly equal to the anount of the savings from
the revenue, either of the particular persons who manage and
direct the employment of that capital, or of some other persons,
who lend it to them. If merchants, artificers, and manufacturers
are, as this system seems to suppose, naturally more inclined to
parsimony and saving than proprietors and cultivators, they are,
so far, more likely to augment the quantity of useful labour
employed within their society, and consequently to increase its
real revenue, the annual produce of its land and labour.

Fifthly and lastly, though the revenue of the inhabitants of
every country was supposed to consist altogether, as this system
seems to suppose, in the quantity of subsistence which their
industry could procure to them; yet, even upon this supposition,
the revenue of a trading and manufacturing country must, other
things being equal, always be much greater than that of one
without trade or manufactures. By means of trade and
manufactures, a greater quantity of subsistence can be annually
imported into a particular country, than what its own lands, in
the actual state of their cultivation, could afford. The
inhabitants of a town, though they frequently possess no lands of
their own, yet draw to themselves, by their industry, such a
quantity of the rude produce of the lands of other people, as
supplies them, not only with the materials of their work, but
with the fund of their subsistence. What a town always is with
regard to the country in its neighbourhood, one independent state
or country may frequently be with regard to other independent
states or countries. It is thus that Holland draws a great part
of its subsistence from other countries; live cattle from
Holstein and Jutland, and corn from almost all the different
countries of Europe. A small quantity of manufactured produce,
purchases a great quantity of rude produce. A trading and
manufacturing country, therefore, naturally purchases, with a
small part of its manufactured produce, a great part of the rude
produce of other countries; while, on the contrary, a country
without trade and manufactures is generally obliged to purchase,
at the expense of a great part of its rude produce, a very small
part of the manufactured produce of other countries. The one
exports what can subsist and accommodate but a very few, and
imports the subsistence and accommodation of a great number. The
other exports the accommodation and subsistence of a great
number, and imports that of a very few only. The inhabitants of
the one must always enjoy a much greater quantity of subsistence
than what their own lands, in the actual state of their
cultivation, could afford. The inhabitants of the other must
always enjoy a much smaller quantity.

This system, however, with all its imperfections, is perhaps the
nearest approximation to the truth that has yet been published
upon the subject of political economy ; and is upon that account,
well worth the consideration of every man who wishes to examine
with attention the principles of that very important science.
Though in representing the labour which is employed upon land as
the only productive labour, the notions which it inculcates are,
perhaps, too narrow and confined ; yet in representing the wealth
of nations as consisting, not in the unconsumable riches of
money, but in the consumable goods annually reproduced by the
labour of the society, and in representing perfect liberty as the
only effectual expedient for rendering this annual reproduction
the greatest possible, its doctrine seems to be in every respect
as just as it is generous and liberal. Its followers are very
numerous ; and as men are fond of paradoxes, and of appearing to
understand what surpasses the comprehensions of ordinary people,
the paradox which it maintains, concerning the unproductive
nature of manufacturing labour, has not, perhaps, contributed a
little to increase the number of its admirers. They have for some
years past made a pretty considerable sect, distinguished in the
French republic of letters by the name of the Economists. Their
works have certainly been of some service to their country; not
only by bringing into general discussion, many subjects which had
never been well examined before, but by influencing, in some
measure, the public administration in favour of agriculture. It
has been in consequence of their representations, accordingly,
that the agriculture of France has been delivered from several of
the oppressions which it before laboured under. The term, during
which such a lease can be granted, as will be valid against every
future purchaser or proprietor of the land, has been prolonged
from nine to twenty-seven years. The ancient provincial
restraints upon the transportation of corn from one province of
the kingdom to another, have been entirely taken away; and the
liberty of exporting it to all foreign countries, has been
established as the common law of the kingdom in all ordinary
cases. This sect, in their works, which are very numerous, and
which treat not only of what is properly called Political
Economy, or of the nature and causes or the wealth of nations,
but of every other branch of the system of civil government, all
follow implicitly, and without any sensible variation, the
doctrine of Mr. Qttesnai. There is, upon this account, little
variety in the greater part of their works. The most distinct and
best connected account of this doctrine is to be found in a
little book written by Mr. Mercier de la Riviere, some time
intendant of Martinico, entitled, The natural and essential Order
of Political Societies. The admiration of this whole sect for
their master, who was himself a man of the greatest modesty and
simplicity, is not inferior to that of any of the ancient
philosophers for the founders of their respective systems. 'There
have been since the world began,' says a very diligent and
respectable author, the Marquis de Mirabeau, 'three great
inventions which have principally given stability to political
societies, independent of many other inventions which have
enriched and adorned them. The first is the invention of writing,
which alone gives human nature the power of transmitting, without
alteration, its laws, its contracts, its annals, and its
discoveries. The second is the invention of money, which binds
together all the relations between civilized societies. The third
is the economical table, the result of the other two, which
completes them both by perfecting their object ; the great
discovery of our age, but of which our posterity will reap the
benefit.'

As the political economy of the nations of modern Europe has been
more favourable to manufactures and foreign trade, the industry
of the towns, than to agriculture, the industry of the country;
so that of other nations has followed a different plan, and has
been more favourable to agriculture than to manufactures and
foreign trade.

The policy of China favours agriculture more than all other
employments. In China, the condition of a labourer is said to be
as much superior to that of an artificer, as in most parts of
Europe that of an artificer is to that of a labourer. In China,
the great ambition of every man is to get possession of a little
bit of land, either in property or in lease ; and leases are
there said to be granted upon very moderate terms, and to be
sufficiently secured to the lessees. The Chinese have little
respect for foreign trade. Your beggarly commerce ! was the
language in which the mandarins of Pekin used to talk to Mr. De
Lange, the Russian envoy, concerning it {See the Journal of Mr.
De Lange, in Bell's Travels, vol. ii. p. 258, 276, 293.}. Except
with Japan, the Chinese carry on, themselves, and in their own
bottoms, little or no foreign trade ; and it is only into one or
two ports of their kingdom that they even admit the ships of
foreign nations. Foreign trade, therefore, is, in China, every
way confined within a much narrower circle than that to which it
would naturally extend itself, if more freedom was allowed to it,
either in their own ships, or in those of foreign nations.

Manufactures, as in a small bulk they frequently contain a great
value, and can upon that account be transported at less expense
from one country to another than most parts of rude produce, are,
in almost all countries, the principal support of foreign trade.
In countries, besides, less extensive, and less favourably
circumstanced for inferior commerce than China, they generally
require the support of foreign trade.     Without an extensive
foreign market, they could not well flourish, either in countries
so moderately extensive as to afford but a narrow home market, or
in countries where the communication between one province and
another was so difficult, as to render it impossible for the
goods of any particular place to enjoy the whole of that home
market which the country could afford. The perfection of
manufacturing industry, it must be remembered, depends altogether
upon the division of labour ; and the degree to which the
division of labour can be introduced into any manufacture, is
necessarily regulated, it has already been shewn, by the extent
of the market. But the great extent of the empire of China, the
vast multitude of its inhabitants, the variety of climate, and
consequently of productions in its different provinces, and the
easy communication by means of water-carriage between the greater
part of them, render the home market of that country of so great
extent, as to be alone sufficient to support very great
manufactures, and to admit of very considerable subdivisions of
labour. The home market of China is, perhaps, in extent, not much
inferior to the market of all the different countries of Europe
put together. A more extensive foreign trade, however, which to
this great home market added the foreign market of all the rest
of the world, especially if any considerable part of this trade
was carried on in Chinese ships, could scarce fail to increase
very much the manufactures of China, and to improve very much the
productive powers of its manufacturing industry. By a more
extensive navigation, the Chinese would naturally learn the art
of using and constructing, themselves, all the different machines
made use of in other countries, as well as the other improvements
of art and industry which are practised in all the different
parts of the world. Upon their present plan, they have little
opportunity of improving themselves by the example of any other
nation, except that of the Japanese.

The policy of ancient Egypt, too, and that of the Gentoo
government of Indostan, seem to have favoured agriculture more
than all other employments.

Both in ancient Egypt and Indostan, the whole body of the people
was divided into different casts or tribes each of which was
confined, from father to son, to a particular employment, or
class of employments. The son of a priest was necessarily a
priest; the son of a soldier, a soldier; the son of a labourer, a
labourer ; the son of a weaver, a weaver ; the son of a tailor, a
tailor, etc. In both countries, the cast of the priests holds the
highest rank, and that of the soldiers the next; and in both
countries the cast of the farmers and labourers was superior to
the casts of merchants and manufacturers.

The government of both countries was particularly attentive to
the interest of agriculture. The works constructed by the ancient
sovereigns of Egypt, for the proper distribution of the waters of
the Nile, were famous in antiquity, and the ruined remains of
some of them are still the admiration of travellers. Those of the
same kind which were constructed by the ancient sovereigns of
Indostan, for the proper distribution of the waters of the
Ganges, as well as of many other rivers, though they have been
less celebrated, seem to have been equally great. Both countries,
accordingly, though subject occasionally to dearths, have been
famous for their great fertility. Though both were extremely
populous, yet, in years of moderate plenty, they were both able
to export great quantities of grain to their neighbours.

The ancient Egyptians had a superstitious aversion to the sea;
and as the Gentoo religion does not permit its followers to light
a fire, nor consequently to dress any victuals, upon the water,
it, in effect, prohibits them from all distant sea voyages.
Both the Egyptians and Indians must have depended almost
altogether upon the navigation of other nations for the
exportation of their surplus produce; and this dependency, as it
must have confined the market, so it must have discouraged the
increase of this surplus produce. It must have discouraged, too,
the increase of the manufactured produce, more than that of the
rude produce. Manufactures require a much more extensive market
than the most important parts of the rude produce of the land. A
single shoemaker will make more than 300 pairs of shoes in the
year; and his own family will not, perhaps, wear out six pairs.
Unless, therefore, he has the custom of, at least, 50 such
families as his own, he cannot dispose of the whole product of
his own labour. The most numerous class of artificers will
seldom, in a large country, make more than one in 50, or one in a
100, of the whole number of families contained in it. But in such
large countries, as France and England, the number of people
employed in agriculture has, by some authors been computed at a
half, by others at a third and by no author that I know of, at
less that a fifth of the whole inhabitants of the country. But as
the produce of the agriculture of both France and England is, the
far greater part of it, consumed at home, each person employed in
it must, according to these computations, require little more
than the custom  of one, two, or, at most, of four such families
as his own, in order to dispose of the whole produce of his own
labour. Agriculture, therefore, can support itself under the
discouragement of a confined market much better than
manufactures. In both ancient Egypt and Indostan, indeed, the
confinement of the foreign market was in some measure compensated
by the conveniency of many inland navigations, which opened, in
the most advantageous manner, the whole extent of the home market
to every part of the produce of every different district of those
countries. The great extent of Indostan, too, rendered the home
market of that country very great, and sufficient to support a
great variety of manufactures. But the small extent of ancient
Egypt, which was never equal to England, must at all times, have
rendered the home market of that country too narrow for
supporting any great variety of manufactures. Bengal accordingly,
the province of Indostan which commonly exports the greatest
quantity of rice, has always been more remarkable for the
exportation of a great variety of manufactures, than for that of
its grain. Ancient Egypt, on the contrary, though it exported
some manufactures, fine linen in particular, as well as some
other goods, was always most distinguished for its great
exportation of grain. It was long the granary of the Roman
empire.

The sovereigns of China, of ancient Egypt, and of the different
kindoms into which Indostan has, at different times, been
divided, have always derived the whole, or by far the most
considerable part, of their revenue, from some sort of land tax
or land rent. This land tax, or land rent, like the tithe in
Europe, consisted in a certain proportion, a fifth, it is said,
of the produce of the land, which was either delivered in kind,
or paid in money, according to a certain valuation, and which,
therefore, varied from year to year, according to all the
variations of the produce. It was natural, therefore, that the
sovereigns of those countries should be particularly attentive to
the interests of agriculture, upon the prosperity or declension
of which immediately depended the yearly increase or diminution
of their own revenue.

The policy of the ancient republics of Greece, and that of Rome,
though it honoured agriculture more than manufactures or foreign
trade, yet seems rather to have discouraged the latter
employments, than to have given any direct or intentional
encouragement to the former. In several of the ancient states of
Greece, foreign trade was prohibited altogether; and in several
others, the employments of artificers and manufacturers were
considered as hurtful to the strength and agility of the human
body, as rendering it incapable of those habits which their
military and gymnastic exercises endeavoured to form in it, and
as thereby disqualifying it, more or less, for undergoing the
fatigues and encountering the dangers of war. Such occupations
were considered as fit only for slaves, and the free citizens of
the states were prohibited from exercising them. Even in those
states where no such prohibition took place, as in Rome and
Athens, the great body of the people were in effect excluded from
all the trades which are now commonly exercised by the lower sort
of the inhabitants of towns.     Such trades were, at Athens and
Rome, all occupied by the slaves of the rich, who exercised them
for the benefit of their masters, whose wealth, power, and
protection, made it almost impossible for a poor freeman to find
a market for his work, when it came into competition with that of
the slaves of the rich. Slaves, however, are very seldom
inventive ; and all the most important improvements, either in
machinery, or in the arrangement and distribution of work, which
facilitate and abridge labour have been the discoveries of
freemen. Should a slave propose any improvement of this kind, his
master would be very apt to consider the proposal as the
suggestion of laziness, and of a desire to save his own labour at
the master's expense. The poor slave, instead of reward would
probably meet with much abuse, perhaps with some punishment. In
the manufactures carried on by slaves, therefore, more labour
must generally have been employed to execute the same quantity of
work, than in those carried on by freemen. The work of the farmer
must, upon that account, generally have been dearer than that of
the latter. The Hungarian mines, it is remarked by Mr.
Montesquieu, though not richer, have always been wrought with
less expense, and therefore with more profit, than the Turkish
mines in their neighbourhood. The Turkish mines are wrought by
slaves; and the arms of those slaves are the only machines which
the Turks have ever thought of employing. The Hungarian mines are
wrought by freemen, who employ a great deal of machinery, by
which they facilitate and abridge their own labour. From the very
little that is known about the price of manufactures in the times
of the Greeks and Romans, it would appear that those of the finer
sort were excessively dear. Silk sold for its weight in gold. It
was not, indeed, in those times an European manufacture ; and as
it was all brought from the East Indies, the distance of the
carriage may in some measure account for the greatness of the
price. The price, however, which a lady, it is said, would
sometimes pay for a piece of very fine linen, seems to have been
equally extravagant ; and as linen was always either an European,
or at farthest, an Egyptian manufacture, this high price can be
accounted for only by the great expense of the labour which must
have been employed about It, and the expense of this labour again
could arise from nothing but the awkwardness of the machinery
which is made use of. The price of fine woollens, too, though not
quite so extravagant, seems, however, to have been much above
that of the present times. Some cloths, we are told by Pliny
{Plin. 1. ix.c.39.}, dyed in a particular manner, cost a hundred
denarii, or 3:6s:8d. the pound weight. Others, dyed in another
manner, cost a thousand denarii the pound weight, or 33:6s:8d.
The Roman pound. it must be remembered, contained only twelve of
our avoirdupois ounces. This high price, indeed, seems to have
been principally owing to the dye. But had not the cloths
themselves been much dearer than any which are made in the
present times, so very expensive a dye would not probably have
been bestowed upon them. The disproportion would have been too
great between the value of the accessory and that of the
principal. The price mentioned by the same author  {Plin. 1.
viii.c.48.}, of some triclinaria, a sort of woollen pillows or
cushions made use of to lean upon as they reclined upon their
couches at table, passes all credibility; some of them being said
to have cost more than 30,000, others more than 300,000. This
high price, too, is not said to have arisen from the dye. In the
dress of the people of fashion of both sexes, there seems to have
been much less variety, it is observed by Dr. Arbuthnot, in
ancient than in modern times; and the very little variety which
we find in that of the ancient statues, confirms his observation.
He infers from this, that their dress must, upon the whole, have
been cheaper than ours; but the conclusion does not seem to
follow. When the expense of fashionable dress is very great, the
variety must be very small. But when, by the improvements in the
productive powers of manufacturing art and industry, the expense
of any one dress comes to be very moderate, the variety will
naturally be very great. The rich, not being able to distinguish
themselves by the expense of any one dress, will naturally
endeavour to do so by the multitude and variety of their dresses.

The greatest and most important branch of the commerce of every
nation, it has already been observed, is that which is carried on
between the inhabitants of the town and those of the country. The
inhabitants of the town draw from the country the rude produce,
which constitutes both the materials of their work and the fund
of their subsistence ; and they pay for this rude produce, by
sending back to the country a certain portion of it manufactured
and prepared for immediate use. The trade which is carried on
between these two different sets of people, consists ultimately
in a certain quantity of rude produce exchanged for a certain
quantity of manufactured produce. The dearer the latter,
therefore, the cheaper the former; and whatever tends in any
country to raise the price of manufactured produce, tends to
lower that of the rude produce of the land, and thereby to
discourage agriculture.     The smaller the quantity of
manufactured produce, which any given quantity of rude produce,
or, what comes to the same thing, which the price of any given
quantity of rude produce, is capable of purchasing, the smaller
the exchangeable value of that given quantity of rude produce;
the smaller the encouragement which either the landlord has to
increase its quantity by improving, or the farmer by cultivating
the land. Whatever, besides, tends to diminish in any country the
number of artificers and manufacturers, tends to diminish the
home market, the most important of all markets, for the rude
produce of the land, and thereby still further to discourage
agriculture.

Those systems, therefore, which preferring agriculture to all
other employments, in order to promote it, impose restraints upon
manufactures and foreign trade, act contrary to the very end
which they propose, and indirectly discourage that very species
of industry which they mean to promote. They are so far, perhaps,
more inconsistent than even the mercantile system. That system,
by encouraging manufactures and foreign trade more than
agriculture, turns a certain portion of the capital of the
society, from supporting a more advantageous, to support a less
advantageous species of industry. But still it really, and in the
end, encourages that species of industry which it means to
promote. Those agricultural systems, on the contrary, really, and
in the end, discourage their own favourite species of industry.

It is thus that every system which endeavours, either, by
extraordinary encouragements to draw towards a particular species
of industry a greater share of the capital of the society than
what would naturally go to it, or, by extraordinary restraints,
to force from a particular species of industry some share of the
capital which would otherwise be employed in it, is, in reality,
subversive of the great purpose which it means to promote.  It
retards, instead of accelerating the progress of the society
towards real wealth and greatness ; and diminishes, instead of
increasing, the real value of the annual produce of its land and
labour.

All systems, either of preference or of restraint, therefore,
being thus completely taken away, the obvious and simple system
of natural liberty establishes itself of its own accord. Every
man, as long as he does not violate the laws of justice, is left
perfectly free to pursue his own interest his own way, and to
bring both his industry and capital into competition with those
of any other man, or order of men. The sovereign is completely
discharged from a duty, in the attempting to perform which he
must always be exposed to innumerable delusions, and for the
proper performance of which, no human wisdom or knowledge could
ever be sufficient ; the duty of superintending the industry of
private people, and of directing it towards the employments most
suitable to the interests of the society. According to the system
of natural liberty, the sovereign has only three duties to attend
to; three duties of great importance, indeed, but plain and
intelligible to common understandings: first, the duty of
protecting the society from the violence and invasion of other
independent societies ; secondly, the duty of protecting, as far
as possible, every member of the society from the injustice or
oppression of every other member of it, or the duty of
establishing an exact administration of justice ; and, thirdly,
the duty of erecting and maintaining certain public works, and
certain public institutions, which it can never be for the
interest of any individual, or small number of individuals to
erect and maintain ; because the profit could never repay the
expense to any individual, or small number of individuals, though
it may frequently do much more than repay it to a great society.

The proper performance of those several duties of the sovereign
necessarily supposes a certain expense ; and this expense again
necessarily requires a certain revenue to support it. In the
following book, therefore, I shall endeavour to explain, first,
what are the necessary expenses of the sovereign or commonwealth;
and which of those expenses ought to be defrayed by the general
contribution of the whole society ; and which of them, by that of
some particular part ouly, or of some particular members of the
society: secondly, what are the different methods in which the
whole society may be made to contribute towards defraying the
expenses incumbent on the whole society ; and what are the
principal advantages and inconveniencies of each of those methods
: and thirdly, what are the reasons and causes which have induced
almost all modern governments to mortgage some part of this
revenue, or to contract debts; and what have been the effects of
those debts upon the real wealth, the annual produce of the land
and labour of the society. The following book, therefore, will
naturally be divided into three chapters.




APPENDIX  TO  BOOK IV

The two following accounts are subjoined, in order to illustrate
and confirm what is said in the fifth chapter of the fourth book,
concerning the Tonnage Bounty to the Whit-herring Fishery.  The
reader, I believe, may depend upon the accuracy of both accounts.


An account of Busses fitted out in Scotland for eleven Years, with
the Number of empty Barrels carried out, and the Number of Barrels
of Herrings caught; also the Bounty, at a Medium, on each Barrel of
Sea-sricks, and on each Barrel when fully packed.

Years   Number of  Empty Barrels  Barrels of Her-  Bounty paid on
         Busses     carried out    rings caught      the Busses
                                                        .  s.  d.
1771          29        5,948        2,832          2,885   0   0
1772         168       41,316       22,237         11,055   7   6
1773         190       42,333       42,055         12,510   8   6
1774         240       59,303       56,365         26,932   2   6
1775         275       69,144       52,879         19,315  15   0
1776         294       76,329       51,863         21,290   7   6
1777         240       62,679       43,313         17,592   2   6
1778         220       56,390       40,958         16,316   2   6
1779         206       55,194       29,367         15,287   0   0
1780         181       48,315       19,885         13,445  12   6
1781         135       33,992       16,593          9,613  15   6

    Totals 2,186      550,943      378,347       165,463  14   0

Sea-sticks     378,347  Bounty, at a medium, for each
                        barrel of sea-sticks,          0   8   2
                        But a barrel of sea-sticks
                        being only reckoned two thirds
                        of a barrel fully packed, one
                        third to be deducted, which
/deducted    126,115  brings the bounty to           0  12   3
Barrels fully
packed         252,231
And if the herings are exported, there is besides a
                                         premium of    0   2   8
So the bounty paid by government in money for each
                                         barrel is     0  14  11

But if to this, the duty of the salt usually taken
credit for as expended in curing each barrel, which
at a medium, is, of foreign, one bushel and one-
fourth of a bushel, at 10s. a-bushel, be added, viz     0  12   6
the bounty on each barrel would amount to              1   7   5

If the herrings are cured with British salt, it will
stand thus, viz.
Bounty as before                                       0  14  11
But if to this bounty, the duty on two bushels of
Scotch salt, at 1s.6d. per bushel, supposed to be
the quantity, at a medium, used in curing each
barrel is added, viz.                                   0   3   0
The bounty on each barrel will amount to               0  17  11

And when buss herrings are enterd for home
consumption in Scotland, and pay the shilling a
barrel of duty, the bounty stands thus, to wit,
                                         as before     0  12   3
From which the shilling a barrel is to be deducted      0   1   0
                                                       0  11   3

But to that there is to be added again, the duty of
the foreign salt used curing a barrel of herring viz    0  12   6
So that the premium allowed for each barrel of her-
rings entered for home consumption is                  1   3   9


If the herrings are cured in British salt, it will
stand as follows viz.
Bounty on each barrel brought in by the busses, as
above                                                  0  12   3
From which deduct 1s. a-barrel, paid at the time
they are entered for home consumption                   0   1   0
                                                       0  11   3

But if to the bounty, the the duty on two bushel
of Scotch salt, at 1s.6d. per bushel supposed to
be the quantity, at a medium, used in curing each
barrel, is added, viz                                   0   3   0
the premium for each barrel entered for home
consumption will be                                    1  14   3

Though the loss of duties upon herrings exported cannot, perhaps,
properly be considerd as bounty, that upon herrings entered for
home consumption certainly may.




An account of the Quantity of Foreign Salt imported into Scotland,
and of Scotch Salt delivered Duty-free from the Works there, for
the Fishery, from the 5th. of April 1771 to the 5th. of April 1782
with the Medium of both for one Year.


                                Foreign Salt      Scotch Salt delivered
           PERIOD                 imported        from the Works
                                  Bushels              Bushels

  From 5th. April 1771 to
      5th. April 1782             936,974              168,226
  Medium for one year              85,159              15,293

It is to be observed, that the bushel of foreign salt weighs 48lbs.,
that of British weighs 56lbs. only.





BOOK   V. OF THE REVENUE OF THE SOVEREIGN OR COMMONWEALTH



CHAPTER   I.

OF THE EXPENSES OF THE SOVEREIGN OR COMMONWEALTH.

PART  I. Of the Expense of Defence.

The first duty of the sovereign, that of protecting the society
from the violence and invasion of other independent societies,
can be performed only by means of a military force. But the
expense both of preparing this military force in time of peace,
and of employing it in time of war, is very different in the
different states of society, in the different periods of
improvement.

Among nations of hunters, the lowest and rudest state of society,
such as we find it among the native tribes of North America,
every man is a warrior, as well as a hunter. When he goes to war,
either to defend his society, or to revenge the injuries which
have been done to it by other societies, he maintains himself by
his own labour, in the same manner as when he lives at home. His
society (for in this state of things there is properly neither
sovereign nor commonwealth) is at no sort of expense, either to
prepare him for the field, or to maintain him while he is in it.

Among nations of shepherds, a more advanced state of society,
such as we find it among the Tartars and Arabs, every man is, in
the same manner, a warrior. Such nations have commonly no fixed
habitation, but live either in tents, or in a sort of covered
waggons, which are easily transported from place to place. The
whole tribe, or nation, changes its situation according to the
different seasons of the year, as well as according to other
accidents. When its herds and flocks have consumed the forage of
one part of the country, it removes to another, and from that to
a third. In the dry season, it comes down to the banks of the
rivers; in the wet season, it retires to the upper country. When
such a nation goes to war, the warriors will not trust their
herds and flocks to the feeble defence of their old men, their
women and children; and their old men, their women and children,
will not be left behind without defence, and without subsistence.
The whole nation, besides, being accustomed to a wandering life,
even in time of peace, easily takes the field in time of war.
Whether it marches as an army, or moves about as a company of
herdsmen, the way of life is nearly the same, though the object
proposed by it be very different. They all go to war together,
therefore, and everyone does as well as he can. Among the
Tartars, even the women have been frequently known to engage in
battle. If they conquer, whatever belongs to the hostile tribe is
the recompence of the victory ; but if they are vanquished, all
is lost; and not only their herds and flocks, but their women and
children. become the booty of the conqueror. Even the greater
part of those who survive the action are obliged to submit to him
for the sake of immediate subsistence. The rest are commonly
dissipated and dispersed in the desert.

The ordinary life, the ordinary exercise of a Tartar or Arab,
prepare him sufficiently for war. Running, wrestling,
cudgel-playing, throwing the javelin, drawing the bow, etc. are
the common pastimes of those who live in the open air, and are
all of them the images of war. When a Tartar or Arab actually
goes to war, he is maintained by his own herds and flocks, which
he carries with him, in the same manner as in peace. His chief or
sovereign (for those nations have all chiefs or sovereigns) is at
no sort of expense in preparing him for the field ; and when he
is in it, the chance of plunder is the only pay which he either
expects or requires.

An army of hunters can seldom exceed two or three hundred men.
The precarious subsistence which the chace affords, could seldom
allow a greater number to keep together for any considerable
time. An army of shepherds, on the contrary, may sometimes amount
to two or three hundred thousand. As long as nothing stops their
progress, as long as they can go on from one district, of which
they have consumed the forage, to another, which is yet entire;
there seems to be scarce any limit to the number who can march on
together. A nation of hunters can never be formidable to the
civilized nations in their neighbourhood; a nation of shepherds
may. Nothing can be more contemptible than an Indian war in North
America; nothing, on the contrary, can be more dreadful than a
Tartar invasion has frequently been in Asia. The judgment of
Thucydides, that both Europe and Asia could not resist the
Scythians united, has been verified by the experience of all
ages. The inhabitants of the extensive, but defenceles plains of
Scythia or Tartary, have been frequently united under the
dominion of the chief of some conquering horde or clan; and the
havock and devastation of Asia have always signalized their
union. The inhabitants of the inhospitable deserts of Arabia, the
other great nation of shepherds, have never been united but once,
under Mahomet and his immediate successors. Their union, which
was more the effect of religious enthusiasm than of conquest, was
signalized in the same manner. If the hunting nations of America
should ever become shepherds, their neighbourhood would be much
more dangerous to the European colonies than it is at present.

In a yet more advanced state of society, among those nations of
husbandmen who have little foreign commerce, and no other
manufactures but those coarse and household ones, which almost
every private family prepares for its own use, every man, in the
same manner, either is a warrior, or easily becomes such. Those
who live by agricuiture generally pass the whole day in the open
air, exposed to all the inclemencies of the seasons. The
hardiness of their ordinary life prepares them for the fatigues
of war, to some of which their necessary occupations bear a great
analogy.  The necessary occupation of a ditcher prepares him to
work in the trenches, and to fortify a camp, as well as to
inclose a field. The ordinary pastimes of such husbandmen are the
same as those of shepherds, and are in the same manner the images
of war. But as husbandmen have less leisure than shepherds, they
are not so frequently employed in those pastimes. They are
soldiers but soldiers not quite so much masters of their
exercise. Such as they are, however, it seldom costs the
sovereign or commonwealth any expense to prepare them for the
field.

Agriculture, even in its rudest and lowest state, supposes a
settlement, some sort of fixed habitation, which cannot be
abandoned without great loss. When a nation of mere husbandmen,
therefore, goes to war, the whole people cannot take the field
together. The old men, the women and children, at least, must
remain at home, to take care of the habitation. All the men of
the military age, however, may take the field, and in small
nations of this kind, have frequently done so. In every nation,
the men of the military age are supposed to amount to about a
fourth or a fifth part of the whole body of the people. If the
campaign, too, should begin after seedtime, and end before
harvest, both the husbandman and his principal labourers can be
spared from the farm without much loss. He trusts that the work
which must be done in the mean time, can be well enough executed
by the old men, the women, and the children. He is not unwilling,
therefore, to serve without pay during a short campaign ; and it
frequently costs the sovereign or commonwealth as little to
maintain him in the field as to prepare him for it. The citizens
of all the different states of ancient Greece seem to have served
in this manner till after the second Persian war; and the people
of Peloponnesus till after the Peloponnesian war. The
Peloponnesians, Thucydides observes, generally left the field in
the summer, and returned home to reap the harvest. The Roman
people, under their kings, and during the first ages of the
republic, served in the same manner. It was not till the seige of
Veii, that they who staid at home began to contribute something
towards maintaining those who went to war. In the European
monarchies, which were founded upon the ruins of the Roman
empire, both before, and for some time after, the establishment
of what is properly called the feudal law, the great lords, with
all their immediate dependents, used to serve the crown at their
own expense. In the field, in the same manner as at home, they
maintained themselves by their own revenue, and not by any
stipend or pay which they received from the king upon that
particular occasion.

In a more advanced state of society, two different causes
contribute to render it altogether impossible that they who take
the field should maintain themselves at their own expense. Those
two causes are, the progress of manufactures, and the improvement
in the art of war.

Though a husbandman should be employed in an expedition, provided
it begins after seedtime, and ends before harvest, the
interruption of his business will not always occasion any
considerable diminution of his revenue. Without the intervention
of his labour, Nature does herself the greater part of the work
which remains to be done. But the moment that an artificer, a
smith, a carpenter, or a weaver, for example, quits his
workhouse, the sole source of his revenue is completely dried up.
Nature does nothing for him ; he does all for himself. When he
takes the field, therefore, in defence of the public, as he has
no revenue to maintain himself, he must necessarily be maintained
by the public. But in a country, of which a great part of the
inhabitants are artificers and manufacturers, a great part of the
people who go to war must be drawn from those classes, and must,
therefore, be maintained by the public as long as they are
employed in its service,

When the art of war, too, has gradually grown up to be a very
intricate and complicated science; when the event of war ceases
to be determined, as in the first ages of society, by a single
irregular skirmish or battle ; but when the contest is generally
spun out through several different campaigns, each of which lasts
during the greater part of the year; it becomes universally
necessary that the public should maintain those who serve the
public in war, at least while they are employed in that service.
Whatever, in time of peace, might be the ordinary occupation of
those who go to war, so very tedious and expensive a service
would otherwise be by far too heavy a burden upon them. After the
second Persian war, accordingly, the armies of Athens seem to
have been generally composed of mercenary troops, consisting,
indeed, partly of citizens, but partly, too, of foreigners; and
all of them equally hired and paid at the expense of the state.
From the time of the siege of Veii, the armies of Rome received
pay for their service during the time which they remained in the
field. Under the feudal governments, the military service, both
of the great lords, and of their immediate dependents, was, after
a certain period, universally exchanged for a payment in money,
which was employed to maintain those who served in their stead.

The number of those who can go to war, in proportion to the whole
number of the people, is necessarily much smaller in a civilized
than in a rude state of society. In a civilized society, as the
soldiers are maintained altogether by the labour of those who are
not soldiers, the number of the former can never exceed what the
latter can maintain, over and above maintaining, in a manner
suitable to their respective stations, both themselves and the
other officers of government and law, whom they are obliged to
maintain. In the little agrarian states of ancient Greece, a
fourth or a fifth part of the whole body of the people considered
the themselves as soldiers, and would sometimes, it is said, take
the field. Among the civilized nations of modern Europe, it is
commonly computed, that not more than the one hundredth part of
the inhabitants of any country can be employed as soldiers,
without ruin to the country which pays the expense of their
service.

The expense of preparing the army for the field seems not to have
become considerable in any nation, till long after that of
maintaining it in the field had devolved entirely upon the
sovereign or commonwealth. In all the different republics of
ancient Greece, to learn his military exercises, was a necessary
part of education imposed by the state upon every free citizen.
In every city there seems to have been a public field, in which,
under the protection of the public magistrate, the young people
were taught their different exercises by different masters. In
this very simple institution consisted the whole expense which
any Grecian state seems ever to have been at, in preparing its
citizens for war. In ancient Rome, the exercises of the Campus
Martius answered the same purpose with those of the Gymnasium in
ancient Greece. Under the feudal governments, the many public
ordinances, that the citizens of every district should practise
archery, as well as several other military exercises, were
intended for promoting the same purpose, but do not seem to have
promoted it so well. Either from want of interest in the officers
entrusted with the execution of those ordinances, or from some
other cause, they appear to have been universally neglected; and
in the progress of all those governments, military exercises seem
to have gone gradually into disuse among the great body of the
people.

In the republics of ancient Greece and Rome, during the whole
period of their existence, and under the feudal govermnents, for
a considerable time after their first establishment, the trade of
a soldier was not a separate, distinct trade, which constituted
the sole or principal occupation of a particular class of
citizens; every subject of the state, whatever might be the
ordinary trade or occupation by which he gained his livelihood,
considered himself, upon all ordinary occasions, as fit likewise
to exercise the trade of a soldier, and, upon many extraordinary
occasions, as bound to exercise it.

The art of war, however, as it is certainly the noblest of all
arts, so, in the progress of improvement, it necessarily becomes
one of the most complicated among them. The state of the
mechanical, as well as some other arts, with which it is
necessarily connected, determines the degree of perfection to
which it is capable of being carried at any particular time. But
in order to carry it to this degree of perfection, it is
necessary that it should become the sole or principal occupation
of a particular class of citizens; and the division of labour is
as necessary for the improvement of this, as of every other art.
Into other arts, the division of labour is naturally introduced
by the prudence of individuals, who find that they promote their
private interest better by confining themselves to a particular
trade, than by exercising a great number. But it is the wisdom of
the state only, which can render the trade of a soldier a
particular trade, separate and distinct from all others. A
private citizen, who, in time of profound peace, and without any
particular encouragement from the public, should spend the
greater part of his time in military exercises, might, no doubt,
both improve himself very much in them, and amuse himself very
well; but he certainly would not promote his own interest. It is
the wisdom of the state only, which can render it for his
interest to give up the greater part of his time to this peculiar
occupation ; and states have not always had this wisdom, even
when their circumstances had become such, that the preservation
of their existence required that they should have it.

A shepherd has a great deal of leisure; a husbmdman, in the rude
state of husbandry, has some; an artificer or manufacturer has
none at all. The first may, without any loss, employ a great deal
of his time in martial exercises ; the second may employ some
part of it ; but the last cannot employ a single hour in them
without some loss, and his attention to his own interest
naturally leads him to neglect them altogether. Those
improvements in husbandry, too, which the progress of arts and
manufactures necessarily introduces, leave the husbandman as
little leisure as the artificer. Military exercises come to be as
much neglected by the inhabitants of the country as by those of
the town, and the great body of the people becomes altogether
unwarlike. That wealth, at the same time, which always follows
the improvements of agriculture and manufactures, and which, in
reality, is no more than the accumulated produce of those
improvements, provokes the invasion of all their neighbours. An
industrious, and, upon that account, a wealthy nation, is of all
nations the most likely to be attacked ; and unless the state
takes some new measure for the public defence, the natural habits
of the people render them altogether incapable of defending
themselves.

In these circumstances, there seem to be but two methods by which
the state can make any tolerable provision for the public
defence.

It may either, first, by means of a very rigorous police, and in
spite of the whole bent of the interest, genius, and inclinations
of the people, enforce the practice of military exercises, and
oblige either all the citizens of the military age, or a certain
number of them, to join in some measure the trade of a soldier to
whatever other trade or profession they may happen to carry on.

Or, secondly, by maintaining and employing a certain number of
citizens in the constant practice of military exercises, it may
render the trade of a soldier a particular trade, separate and
distinct from all others.

If the state has recourse to the first of those two expedients,
its military force is said to consist in a militia; if to the
second, it is said to consist in a standing army. The practice of
military exercises is the sole or principal occupation of the
soldiers of a standing army, and the maintenance or pay which the
state affords them is the principal and ordinary fund of their
subsistence. The practice of military exercises is only the
occasional occupation of the soldiers of a militia, and they
derive the principal and ordinary fund of their subsistence from
some other occupation. In a militia, the character of the
labourer, artificer, or tradesman, predominates over that of the
soldier; in a standing army, that of the soldier predominates
over every other character ; and in this distinction seems to
consist the essential difference between those two different
species of military force.

Militias have been of several different kinds. In some countries,
the citizens destined for defending the state seem to have been
exercised only, without being, if I may say so, regimented; that
is, without being divided into separate and distinct bodies of
troops, each of which performed its exercises under its own
proper and permanent officers. In the republics of ancient Greece
and Rome, each citizen, as long as he remained at home, seems to
have practised his exercises, either separately and
independently, or with such of his equals as he liked best; and
not to have been attached to any particular body of troops, till
he was actually called upon to take the field. In other
countries, the militia has not only been exercised, but
regimented. In England, in Switzerland, and, I believe, in every
other country of modern Europe, where any imperfect military
force of this kind has been established, every militiaman is,
even in time of peace, attached to a particular body of troops,
which performs its exercises under its own proper and permanent
officers.

Before the invention of fire-arms, that army was superior in
which the soldiers had, each individually, the greatest skill and
dexterity in the use of their arms. Strength and agility of body
were of the highest consequence, and commonly determined the fate
of battles. But this skill and dexterity in the use of their arms
could be acquired only, in the same manner as fencing is at
present, by practising, not in great bodies, but each man
separately, in a particular school, under a particular master, or
with his own particular equals and companions. Since the
invention of fire-arms, strength and agility of body, or even
extraordinary dexterity and skill in the use of arms, though they
are far from being of no consequence, are, however, of less
consequence. The nature of the weapon, though it by no means puts
the awkward upon a level with the skilful, puts him more nearly
so than he ever was before. All the dexterity and skill, it is
supposed, which are necessary for using it, can be well enough
acquired by practising in great bodies.

Regularity, order, and prompt obedience to command, are qualities
which, in modern armies, are of more importance towards
determining the fate of battles, than the dexterity and skill of
the soldiers in the use of their arms. But the noise of
fire-arms, the smoke, and the invisible death to which every man
feels himself every moment exposed, as soon as he comes within
cannon-shot, and frequently a long time before the battle can be
well said to be engaged, must render it very difficult to
maintain any considerable degree of this regularity, order, and
prompt obedience, even in the beginning of a modern battle. In an
ancient battle, there was no noise but what arose from the human
voice ; there was no smoke, there was no invisible cause of
wounds or death. Every man, till some mortal weapon actually did
approach him, saw clearly that no such weapon was near him.
In these circumstances, and among troops who had some confidence
in their own skill and dexterity in the use of their arms, it
must have been a good deal less difficult to preserve some degree
of regularity and order, not only in the beginning, but through
the whole progress of an ancient battle, and till one of the two
armies was fairly defeated. But the habits of regularity, order,
and prompt obedience to command, can be acquired only by troops
which are exercised in great bodies.

A militia, however, in whatever manner it may be either
disciplined or exercised, must always be much inferior to a well
disciplined and well exercised standing army.

The soldiers who are exercised only once aweek, or once a-month,
can never be so expert in the use of their arms, as those who are
exercised every day, or every other day; and though this
circumstance may not be of so much consequence in modern, as it
was in ancient times, yet the acknowledged superiority of the
Prussian troops, owing, it is said, very much to their superior
expertness in their exercise, may satisfy us that it is, even at
this day, of very considerable consequence.

The soldiers, who are bound to obey their officer only once
a-week, or once a-month, and who are at all other times at
liberty to manage their own affairs their own way, without being,
in any respect, accountable to him, can never be under the same
awe in his presence, can never have the same disposition to ready
obedience, with those whose whole life and conduct are every day
directed by him, and who every day even rise and go to bed, or at
least retire to their quarters, according to his orders. In what
is called discipline, or in the habit of ready obedience, a
militia must always be still more inferior to a standing army,
than it may sometimes be in what is called the manual exercise,
or in the management and use of its arms. But, in modern war, the
habit of ready and instant obedience is of much greater
consequence than a considerable superiority in the management of
arms.

Those militias which, like the Tartar or Arab militia, go to war
under the same chieftains whom they are accustomed to obey in
peace, are by far the best. In respect for their officers, in the
habit of ready obedience, they approach nearest to standing
armies The Highland militia, when it served under its own
chieftains, had some advantage of the same kind. As the
Highlanders, however, were not wandering, but stationary
shepherds, as they had all a fixed habitation, and were not, in
peaceable times, accustomed to follow their chieftain from place
to place; so, in time of war, they were less willing to follow
him to any considerable distance, or to continue for any long
time in the field. When they had acquired any booty, they were
eager to return home, and his authority was seldom sufficient to
detain them. In point of obedience, they were always much
inferior to what is reported of the Tartars and Arabs. As the
Highlanders, too, from their stationary life, spend less of their
time in the open air, they were always less accustomed to
military exercises, and were less expert in the use of their arms
than the Tartars and Arabs are said to be.

A militia of any kind, it must be observed, however, which has
served for several successive campaigns in the field, becomes in
every respect a standing army. The soldiers are every day
exercised in the use of their arms, and, being constantly under
the command of their officers, are habituated to the same prompt
obedience which takes place in standing armies.     What they
were before they took the field, is of little importance. They
necessarily become in every respect a standing army, after they
have passed a few campaigns in it. Should the war in America drag
out through another campaign, the American militia may become, in
every respect, a match for that standing army, of which the
valour appeared, in the last war at least, not inferior to that
of the hardiest veterans of France and Spain.

This distinction being well understood, the history of all ages,
it will be found, hears testimony to the irresistible superiority
which a well regulated standing army has over a militia.

One of the first standing armies, of which we have any distinct
account in any well authenticated history, is that of Philip of
Macedon. His frequent wars with the Thracians, Illyrians,
Thessalians, and some of the Greek cities in the neighbourhood of
Macedon, gradually formed his troops, which in the beginning were
probably militia, to the exact discipline of a standing army.
When he was at peace, which he was very seldom, and never for any
long time together, he was careful not to disband that army. It
vanquished and subdued, after a long and violent struggle,
indeed, the gallant and well exercised militias of the principal
republics of ancient Greece; and afterwards, with very little
struggle, the effeminate and ill exercised militia of the great
Persian empire. The fall of the Greek republics, and of the
Persian empire was the effect of the irresistible superiority
which a standing arm has over every other sort of militia.     It
is the first great revolution in the affairs of mankind of which
history has preserved any distinct and circumstantial account.

The fall of Carthage, and the consequent elevation of Rome, is
the second. All the varieties in the fortune of those two famous
republics may very well be accounted for from the same cause.

From the end of the first to the beginning of the second
Carthaginian war, the armies of Carthage were continually in the
field, and employed under three great generals, who succeeded one
another in the command; Amilcar, his son-in-law Asdrubal, and his
son Annibal: first in chastising their own rebellious slaves,
afterwards in subduing the revolted nations of Africa; and
lastly, in conquering the great kingdom of Spain. The army which
Annibal led from Spain into Italy must necessarily, in those
different wars, have been gradually formed to the exact
discipline of a standing army.     The Romans, in the meantime,
though they had not been altogether at peace, yet they had not,
during this period, been engaged in any war of very great
consequence; and their military discipline, it is generally said,
was a good deal relaxed. The Roman armies which Annibal
encountered at Trebi, Thrasymenus, and Cannae, were militia
opposed to a standing army. This circumstance, it is probable,
contributed more than any other to determine the fate of those
battles.

The standing army which Annibal left behind him in Spain had the
like superiority over the militia which the Romans sent to oppose
it; and, in a few years, under the command of his brother, the
younger Asdrubal, expelled them almost entirely from that
country.

Annibal was ill supplied from home. The Roman militia, being
continually in the field, became, in the progress of the war, a
well disciplined and well exercised standing army ; and the
superiority of Annibal grew every day less and less. Asdrubal
judged it necessary to lead the whole, or almost the whole, of
the standing army which he commanded in Spain, to the assistance
of his brother in Italy. In this march, he is said to have been
misled by his guides ; and in a country which he did not know,
was surprised and attacked, by another standing army, in every
respect equal or superior to his own, and was entirely defeated.

When Asdrubal had left Spain, the great Scipio found nothing to
oppose him but a militia inferior to his own. He conquered and
subdued that militia, and, in the course of the war, his own
militia necessarily became a well disciplined and well exercised
standing army. That standing army was afterwards carried to
Africa, where it found nothing but a militia to oppose it. In
order to defend Carthage, it became necessary to recal the
standing army of Annibal. The disheartened and frequently
defeated African militia joined it, and, at the battle of Zama,
composed the greater part of the troops of Annibal. The event of
that day determined the fate of the two rival republics.

From the end of the second Carthaginian war till the fall of the
Roman republic, the armies of Rome were in every respect standing
armies. The standing army of Macedon made some resistance to
their arms. In the height of their grandeur, it cost them two
great wars, and three great battles, to subdue that little
kingdom, of which the conquest would probably have been still
more difficult, had it not been for the cowardice of its last
king. The militias of all the civilized nations of the ancient
world, of Greece, of Syria, and of Egypt, made but a feeble
resistance to the standing armies of Rome. The militias of some
barbarous nations defended themselves much better.     The
Scythian or Tartar militia, which Mithridates drew from the
countries north of the Euxine and Caspian seas, were the most
formidable enemies whom the Romans had to encounter after the
second Carthaginian war. The Parthian and German militias, too,
were always respectable, and upon several occasions, gained very
considerable advantages over the Roman armies. In general,
however, and when the Roman armies were well commanded, they
appear to have been very much superior; and if the Romans did not
pursue the final conquest either of Parthia or Germany, it was
probably because they judged that it was not worth while to add
those two barbarous countries to an empire which was already too
large. The ancient Parthians appear to have been a nation of
Scythian or Tartar extraction, and to have always retained a good
deal of the manners of their ancestors. The ancient Germans were,
like the Scythians or Tartars, a nation of wandering shepherds,
who went to war under the same chiefs whom they were accustomed
to follow in peace. 'Their militia was exactly of the same kind
with that of the Scythians or Tartars, from whom, too, they were
probably descended.

Many different causes contributed to relax the discipline of the
Roman armies. Its extreme severity was, perhaps, one of those
causes. In the days of their grandeur, when no enemy appeared
capable of opposing them, their heavy armour was laid aside as
unnecessarily burdensome, their laborious exercises were
neglected, as unnecessarily toilsome. Under the Roman emperors,
besides, the standing armies of Rome, those particularly which
guarded the German and Pannonian frontiers, became dangerous to
their masters, against whom they used frequently to set up their
own generals. In order to render them less formidable, according
to some authors, Dioclesian, according to others, Constantine,
first withdrew them from the frontier, where they had always
before been encamped in great bodies, generally of two or three
legions each, and dispersed them in small bodies through the
different provincial towns, from whence they were scarce ever
removed, but when it became necessary to repel an invasion. Small
bodies of soldiers, quartered in trading and manufacturing towns,
and seldom removed from those quarters, became themselves trades
men, artificers, and manufacturers. The civil came to predominate
over the military character ; and the standing armies of Rome
gradually degenerated into a corrupt, neglected. and
undisciplined militia, incapable of resisting the attack of the
German and Scythian militias, which soon afterwards invaded the
western empire. It was only by hiring the militia of some of
those nations to oppose to that of others, that the emperors were
for some time able to defend themselves. The fall of the western
empire is the third great revolution in the affairs of mankind,
of which ancient history has preserved any distinct or
circumstantial account.     It was brought about by the
irresistible superiority which the militia of a barbarous has
over that of a civilized nation; which the militia of a nation of
shepherds has over that of a nation of husbandmen, artificers,
and manufacturers. The victories which have been gained by
militias have generally been, not over standing armies, but over
other militias, in exercise and discipline inferior to
themselves. Such were the victories which the Greek militia
gained over that of the Persian empire; and such, too, were those
which, in later times, the Swiss militia gained over that of the
Austrians and Burgundians.

The military force of the German and Scythian nations, who
established themselves upon ruins of the western empire,
continued for some time to be of the same kind in their new
settlements, as it had been in their original country. It was a
militia of shepherds and husbandmen, which, in time of war, took
the field under the command of the same chieftains whom it was
accustomed to obey in peace. It was, therefore, tolerably well
exercised, and tolerably well disciplined. As arts and industry
advanced, however, the authority of the chieftains gradually
decayed, and the great body of the people had less time to spare
for military exercises. Both the discipline and the exercise of
the feudal militia, therefore, went gradually to ruin, and
standing armies were gradually introduced to supply the place of
it. When the expedient of a standing army, besides, had once been
adopted by one civilized nation, it became necessary that all its
neighbours should follow the example. They soon found that their
safety depended upon their doing so, and that their own militia
was altogether incapable of resisting the attack of such an army.

The soldiers of a standing army, though they may never have seen
an enemy, yet have frequently appeared to possess all the courage
of veteran troops, and, the very moment that they took the field,
to have been fit to face the hardiest and most experienced
veterans. In 1756, when the Russian army marched into Poland, the
valour of the Russian soldiers did not appear inferior to that of
the Prussians, at that time supposed to be the hardiest and most
experienced veterans in Europe. The Russian empire, however, had
enjoyed a profound peace for near twenty years before, and could
at that time have very few soldiers who had ever seen an enemy.
When the Spanish war broke out in 1739, England had enjoyed a
profound peace for about eight-and-twenty years. The valour of
her soldiers, however, far from being corrupted by that long
peace, was never more distinguished than in the attempt upon
Carthagena, the first unfortunate exploit of that unfortunate
war. In a long peace, the generals, perhaps, may sometimes forget
their skill; but where a well regulated standing army has been
kept up, the soldiers seem never to forget their valour.

When a civilized nation depends for its defence upon a militia,
it is at all times exposed to be conquered by any barbarous
nation which happens to be in its neighbourhood.     The frequent
conquests of all the civilized countries in Asia by the Tartars,
sufficiently demonstrates the natural superiority which the
militia of a barbarous has over that of a civilized nation. A
well regulated standing army is superior to every militia.
Such an army, as it can best be maintained by an opulent and
civilized nation, so it can alone defend such a nation against
the invasion of a poor and barbarous neighbour. It is only by
means of a standing army, therefore, that the civilization of any
country can be perpetuated, or even preserved, for any
considerable time.

As it is only by means of a well regulated standing army, that a
civilized country can be defended, so it is only by means of it
that a barbarous country can be suddenly and tolerably civilized.
A standing army establishes, with an irresistible force, the law
of the sovereign through the remotest provinces of the empire,
and maintains some degree of regular government in countries
which could not otherwise admit of any. Whoever examines with
attention, the improvements which Peter the Great introduced into
the Russian empire, will find that they almost all resolve
themselves into the establishment of a well regulated standing
army. It is the instrument which executes and maintains all his
other regulations. That degree of order and internal peace, which
that empire has ever since enjoyed, is altogether owing to the
influence of that army.

Men of republican principles have been jealous of a standing
army, as dangerous to liberty. It certainly is so, wherever the
interest of the general, and that of the principal officers, are
not necessarily connected with the support of the constitution of
the state. The standing army of Czesar destroyed the Roman
republic. The standing army of Cromwell turned the long
parliament out of doors. But where the sovereign is himself the
general, and the principal nobility and gentry of the country the
chief officers of the army ; where the military force is placed
under the command of those who have the greatest interest in the
support of the civil authority, because they have themselves the
greatest share of that authority, a standing army can never be
dangerous to liberty. On the contrary, it may, in some cases, be
favourable to liberty. The security which it gives to the
sovereign renders unnecessary that troublesome jealousy, which,
in some modern republics, seems to watch over the minutest
actions, and to be at all times ready to disturb the peace of
every citizen. Where the security of the magistrate, though
supported by the principal people of the country, is endangered
by every popular discontent; where a small tumult is capable of
bringing about in a few hours a great revolution, the whole
authority of government must be employed to suppress and punish
every murmur and complaint against it. To a sovereign, on the
contrary, who feels himself supported, not only by the natural
aristocracy of the country, but by a well regulated standing
army, the rudest, the most groundless, and the most licentious
remonstrances, can give little disturbance. He can safely pardon
or neglect them, and his consciousness of his own superiority
naturally disposes him to do so. That degree of liberty which
approaches to licentiousness, can be tolerated only in countries
where the sovereign is secured by a well regulated standing army.
It is in such countries only, that the public safety does not
require that the sovereign should be trusted with any
discretionary power, for suppressing even the impertinent
wantonness of this licentious liberty.

The first duty of the sovereign, therefore, that of defending the
society from the violence and injustice of other independent
societies, grows gradually more and more expensive, as the
society advances in civilization.     The military force of the
society, which originally cost the sovereign no expense, either
in time of peace, or in time of war, must, in the progress of
improvement, first be maintained by him in time of war, and
afterwards even in time of peace.

The great change introduced into the art of war by the invention
of fire-arms, has enhanced still further both the expense of
exercising and disciplining any particular number of soldiers in
time of peace, and that of employing them in time of war. Both
their arms and their ammunition are become more expensive. A
musket is a more expensive machine than a javelin or a bow and
arrows; a cannon or a mortar, than a balista or a catapulta. The
powder which is spent in a modern review is lost irrecoverably,
and occasions a very considerable expense. The javelins and
arrows which were thrown or shot in an ancient one, could easily
be picked up again, and were, besides, of very little value. The
cannon and the mortar are not only much dearer, but much heavier
machines than the balista or catapulta; and require a greater
expense, not only to prepare them for the field, but to carry
them to it. As the superiority of the modern artillery, too, over
that of the ancients, is very great ; it has become much more
difficult, and consequently much more expensive, to fortify a
town, so as to resist, even for a few weeks, the attack of that
superior artillery. In modern times, many different causes
contribute to render the defence of the society more expensive.
The unavoidable effects of the natural progress of improvement
have, in this respect, been a good deal enhanced by a great
revolution in the art of war, to which a mere accident, the
invention of gunpowder, seems to have given occasion.

In modern war, the great expense of firearms gives an evident
advantage to the nation which can best afford that expense; and,
consequently, to an opulent and civilized, over a poor and
barbarous nation. In ancient times, the opulent and civilized
found it difficult to defend themselves against the poor and
barbarous nations. In modern times, the poor and barbarous find
it difficult to defend themselves against the opulent and
civilized. The invention of fire-arms, an invention which at
first sight appears to be so pernicious, is certainly favourable,
both to the permanency and to the extension of civilization.

PART   II.

Of the Expense of Justice

The second duty of the sovereign, that of protecting, as far as
possible, every member of the society from the injustice or
oppression of every other member of it, or the duty of
establishing an exact administration of justice, requires two
very different degrees of expense in the different periods of
society.

Among nations of hunters, as there is scarce any property, or at
least none that exceeds the value of two or three days labour ;
so there is seldom any established magistrate, or any regular
administration of justice. Men who have no property, can injure
one another only in their persons or reputations. But when one
man kills, wounds, beats, or defames another, though he to whom
the injury is done suffers, he who does it receives no benefit.
It is otherwise with the injuries to property. The benefit of the
person who does the injury is often equal to the loss of him who
suffers it. Envy, malice, or resentment, are the only passions
which can prompt one man to injure another in his person or
reputation. But the greater part of men are not very frequently
under the influence of those passions; and the very worst men are
so only occasionally. As their gratification, too, how agreeable
soever it may be to certain characters, is not attended with any
real or permanent advantage, it is, in the greater part of men,
commonly restrained by prudential considerations. Men may live
together in society with some tolerable degree of security,
though there is no civil magistrate to protect them from the
injustice of those passions. But avarice and ambition in the
rich, in the poor the hatred of labour and the love of present
ease and enjoyment, are the passions which prompt to invade
property ; passions much more steady in their operation, and much
more universal in their influence. Wherever there is a great
property, there is great inequality. For one very rich man, there
must be at least five hundred poor, and the affluence of the few
supposes the indigence of the many. The affluence of the rich
excites the indignation of the poor, who are often both driven by
want, and prompted by envy to invade his possessions. It is only
under the shelter of the civil magistrate, that the owner of that
valuable property, which is acquired by the labour of many years,
or perhaps of many successive generations, can sleep a single
night in security. He is at all times surrounded by unknown
enemies, whom, though he never provoked, he can never appease,
and from whose injustice he can be protected only by the powerful
arm of the civil magistrate, continually held up to chastise it.
The acquisition of valuable and extensive property, therefore,
necessarily requires the establishment of civil government. Where
there is no property, or at least none that exceeds the value of
two or three days labour, civil government is not so necessary.

Civil government supposes a certain subordination. But as the
necessity of civil government gradually grows up with the
acquisition of valuable property; so the principal causes, which
naturally introduce subordination, gradually grow up with the
growth of that valuable property.

The causes or circumstances which naturally introduce
subordination, or which naturally and antecedent to any civil
institution, give some men some superiority over the greater part
of their brethren, seem to be four in number.

The first of those causes or circumstances, is the superiority of
personal qualifications, of strength, beauty, and agility of body
; of wisdom and virtue; of prudence, justice, fortitude, and
moderation of mind. The qualifications of the body, unless
supported by those of the mind, can give little authority in any
period of society. He is a very strong man, who, by mere strength
of body, can force two weak ones to obey him. The qualifications
of the mind can alone give very great authority They are however,
invisible qualities; always disputable, and generally disputed.
No society, whether barbarous or civilized, has ever found it
convenient to settle the rules of precedency of rank and
subordination, according to those invisible qualities; but
according to something that is more plain and palpable.

The second of those causes or circumstances, is the superiority
of age. An old man, provided his age is not so far advanced as to
give suspicion of dotage, is everywhere more respected than a
young man of equal rank, fortune, and abilities. Among nations of
hunters, such as the native tribes of North America, age is the
sole foundation of rank and precedency. Among them, father is the
appellation of a superior ; brother, of an equal ; and son, of an
inferior. In the most opulent and civilized nations, age
regulates rank among those who are in every other respect equal ;
and among whom, therefore, there is nothing else to regulate it.
Among brothers and among sisters, the eldest always takes place ;
and in the succession of the paternal estate, every thing which
cannot be divided, but must go entire to one person, such as a
title of honour, is in most cases given to the eldest. Age is a
plain and palpable quality, which admits of no dispute.

The third of those causes or circumstances, is the superiority of
fortune. The authority of riches, however, though great in every
age of society, is, perhaps, greatest in the rudest ages of
society, which admits of any considerable inequality of fortune.
A Tartar chief, the increase of whose flocks and herds is
sufficient to maintain a thousand men, cannot well employ that
increase in any other way than in maintaining a thousand men. The
rude state of his society does not afford him any manufactured
produce any trinkets or baubles of any kind, for which he can
exchange that part of his rude produce which is over and above
his own consumption. The thousand men whom he thus maintains,
depending entirely upon him for their subsistence, must both obey
his orders in war, and submit to his jurisdiction in peace. He is
necessarily both their general and their judge, and his
chieftainship is the necessary effect of the superiority of his
fortune. In an opulent and civilized society, a man may possess a
much greater fortune, and yet not be able to command a dozen of
people. Though the produce of his estate may be sufficient to
maintain, and may, perhaps, actually maintain, more than a
thousand people, yet, as those people pay for every thing which
they get from him, as he gives scarce any thing to any body but
in exchange for an equivalent, there is scarce anybody who
considers himself as entirely dependent upon him, and his
authority extends only over a few menial servants. The authority
of fortune, however, is very great, even in an opulent and
civilized society. That it is much greater than that either of
age or of personal qualities, has been the constant complaint of
every period of society which admitted of any considerable
inequality of fortune.     The first period of society, that of
hunters, admits of no such inequality. Universal poverty
establishes their universal equality ; and the superiority,
either of age or of personal qualities, are the feeble, but the
sole foundations of authority and subordination. There is,
therefore, little or no authority or subordination in this period
of society. The second period of society, that of shepherds,
admits of very great inequalities of fortune, and there is no
period in which the superiority of fortune gives so great
authority to those who possess it. There is no period,
accordingly, in which authority and subordination are more
perfectly established. The authority of an Arabian scherif is
very great; that of a Tartar khan altogether despotical.

The fourth of those causes or circumstances, is the superiority
of birth. Superiority of birth supposes an ancient superiority of
fortune in the family of the person who claims it. All families
are equally ancient ; and the ancestors of the prince, though
they may be better known, cannot well be more numerous than those
of the beggar. Antiquity of family means everywhere the antiquity
either of wealth, or of that greatness which is commonly either
founded upon wealth, or accompanied with it. Upstart greatness is
everywhere less respected than ancient greatness. The hatred of
usurpers, the love of the family of an ancient monarch, are in a
great measure founded upon the contempt which men naturally have
for the former, and upon their veneration for the latter. As a
military officer submits, without reluctance, to the authority of
a superior by whom he has always been commanded, but cannot bear
that his inferior should be set over his head; so men easily
submit to a family to whom they and their ancestors have always
submitted; but are fired with indignation when another family, in
whom they had never acknowledged any such superiority, assumes a
dominion over them.

The distinction of birth, being subsequent to the inequality of
fortune, can have no place in nations of hunters, among whom all
men, being equal in fortune, must likewise be very nearly equal
in birth. The son of a wise and brave man may, indeed, even among
them, be somewhat more respected than a man of equal merit, who
has the misfortune to be the son of a fool or a coward. The
difference, however will not be very great; and there never was,
I believe, a great family in the world, whose illustration was
entirely derived from the inheritance of wisdom and virtue.

The distinction of birth not only may, but always does, take
place among nations of shepherds. Such nations are always
strangers to every sort of luxury, and great wealth can scarce
ever be dissipated among them by improvident profusion. There are
no nations, accordingly, who abound more in families revered and
honoured on account of their descent from a long race of great
and illustrious ancestors ; because there are no nations among
whom wealth is likely to continue longer in the same families.

Birth and fortune are evidently the two circumstances which
principally set one man above another. They are the two great
sources of personal distinction, and are, therefore, the
principal causes which naturally establish authority and
subordination among men. Among nations of shepherds, both those
causes operate with their full force. The great shepherd or
herdsman, respected on account of his great wealth, and of the
great number of those who depend upon him for subsistence, and
revered on account of the nobleness of his birth, and of the
immemorial antiquity or his illustrious family, has a natural
authority over all the inferior shepherds or herdsmen of his
horde or clan. He can command the united force of a greater
number of people than any of them. His military power is greater
than that of any of them. In time of war, they are all of them
naturally disposed to muster themselves under his banner, rather
than under that of any other person ; and his birth and fortune
thus naturally procure to him some sort of executive power. By
commanding, too, the united force of a greater number of people
than any of them, he is best able to compel any one of them, who
may have injured another, to compensate the wrong. He is the
person, therefore, to whom all those who are too weak to defend
themselves naturally look up for protection. It is to him that
they naturally complain of the injuries which they imagine have
been done to them ; and his interposition, in such cases, is more
easily submitted to, even by the person complained of, than that
of any other person would be. His birth and fortune thus
naturally procure him some sort of judicial authority.

It is in the age of shepherds, in the second period of society,
that the inequality of fortune first begins to take place, and
introduces among men a degree of authority and subordination,
which could not possibly exist before. It thereby introduces some
degree of that civil government which is indispensably necessary
for its own preservation; and it seems to do this naturally, and
even independent of the consideration of that necessity. The
consideration of that necessity comes, no doubt, afterwards, to
contribute very much to maintain and secure that authority and
subordination. The rich, in particular, are necesarily interested
to support that order of things, which can alone secure them in
the possession of their own advantages. Men of inferior wealth
combine to defend those of superior wealth in the possession of
their property, in order that men of superior wealth may combine
to defend them in the possession of theirs. All the inferior
shepherds and herdsmen feel, that the security of their own herds
and flocks depends upon the security of those of the great
shepherd or herdsman; that the maintenance of their lesser
authority depends upon that of his greater authority ; and that
upon their subordination to him depends his power of keeping
their inferiors in subordination to them. They constitute a sort
of little nobility, who feel themselves interested to defend the
property, and to support the authority, of their own little
sovereign. in order that he may be able to defend their property,
and to support their authority. Civil government, so far as it is
instituted for the security of property, is, in reality,
instituted for the defence of the rich against the poor, or of
those who have some property against those who have none at all.

The judicial authority of such a sovereign, however, far from
being a cause of expense, was, for a long time, a source of
revenue to him. The persons who applied to him for justice were
always willing to pay for it, and a present never failed to
accompany a petition. After the authority of the sovereign, too,
was thoroughly established, the person found guilty, over and
above the satisfaction which he was obliged to make to the party,
was like-wise forced to pay an amercement to the sovereign. He
had given trouble, he had disturbed, he had broke the peace of
his lord the king, and for those offences an amercement was
thought due. In the Tartar governments of Asia, in the
governments of Europe which were founded by the German and
Scythian nations who overturned the Roman empire, the
administration of justice was a considerable source of revenue,
both to the sovereign, and to all the lesser chiefs or lords who
exercised under him any particular jurisdiction, either over some
particular tribe or clan, or over some particular territory or
district. Originally, both the sovereign and the inferior chiefs
used to exercise this jurisdiction in their own persons.
Afterwards, they universally found it convenient to delegate it
to some substitute, bailiff, or judge. This substitute, however,
was still obliged to account to his principal or constituent for
the profits of the jurisdiction. Whoever reads the instructions
(They are to be found in Tyrol's History of England) which were
given to the judges of the circuit in the time of Henry II will
see clearly that those judges were a sort of itinerant factors,
sent round the country for the purpose of levying certain
branches of the king's revenue. In those days, the administration
of justice not only afforded a certain revenue to the sovereign,
but, to procure this revenue, seems to have been one of the
principal advantages which he proposed to obtain by the
administration of justice.

This scheme of making the administration of justice subservient
to the purposes of revenue, could scarce fail to be productive of
several very gross abuses. The person who applied for justice
with a large present in his hand, was likeiy to get something
more than justice; while he who applied for it with a small one
was likely to get something less. Justice, too, might frequently
be delayed, in order that this present might be repeated. The
amercement, besides, of the person complained of, might
frequently suggest a very strong reason for finding him in the
wrong, even when he had not really been so. That such abuses were
far from being uncommon, the ancient history of every country in
Europe bears witness.

When the sovereign or chief exercises his judicial authority in
his own person, how much soever he might abuse it, it must have
been scarce possible to get any redress ; because there could
seldom be any body powerful enough to call him to account. When
he exercised it by a bailiff, indeed, redress might sometimes be
had. If it was for his own benefit only, that the bailiff had
been guilty of an act of injustice, the sovereign himself might
not always be unwilling to punish him, or to oblige him to repair
the wrong. But if it was for the benefit of his sovereign; if it
was in order to make court to the person who appointed him, and
who might prefer him, that he had committed any act of oppression
; redress would, upon most occasions, be as impossible as if the
sovereign had committed it himself. In all barbarous governments,
accordingly, in all those ancient governments of Europe in
particular, which were founded upon the ruins of the Roman
empire, the administration of justice appears for a long time to
have been extremely corrupt ; far from being quite equal and
impartial, even under the best monarchs, and altogether
profligate under the worst.

Among nations of shepherds, where the sovereign or chief is only
the greatest shepherd or herdsman of the horde or clan, he is
maintained in the same manner as any of his vassals or subjects,
by the increase of his own herds or flocks. Among those nations
of husbandmen, who are but just come out of the shepherd state,
and who are not much advanced beyond that state, such as the
Greek tribes appear to have been about the time of the Trojan
war, and our German and Scythian ancestors, when they first
settled upon the ruins of the western empire; the sovereign or
chief is, in the same manner, only the greatest landlord of the
country, and is maintained in the same manner as any other
landlord, by a revenue derived from his own private estate. or
from what, in modern Europe, was called the demesne of the crown.
His subjects, upon ordinary occasions, contribute nothing to his
support, except when, in order to protect them from the
oppression of some of their fellow-subjects, they stand in need
of his authority. The presents which they make him upon such
occasions constitute the whole ordinary revenue, the whole of the
emoluments which, except, perhaps, upon some very extraordinary
emergencies, he derives from his dominion over them. When
Agamemnon, in Homer, offers to Achilles, for his friendship, the
sovereignty of seven Greek cities, the sole advantage which he
mentions as likely to be derived from it was, that the people
would honour him with presents. As long as such presents, as long
as the emoluments of justice, or what may be called the fees of
court, constituted, in this manner, the whole ordinary revenue
which the sovereign derived from his sovereignty, it could not
well be expected, it could not even decently be proposed, that he
should give them up altogether. It might, and it frequently was
proposed, that he should regulate and ascertain them. But after
they had been so regulated and ascertained, how to hinder a
person who was all-powerful from extending them beyond those
regulations, was still very difficult, not to say impossible.
During the continuance of this state of things, therefore, the
corruption of justice, naturally resulting from the arbitrary and
uncertain nature of those presents, scarce admitted of any
effectual remedy.

But when, from different causes, chiefly from the continually
increasing expense of defending the nation against the invasion
of other nations, the private estate of the sovereign had become
altogether insufficient for defraying the expense of the
sovereignty; and when it had become necessary that the people
should, for their own security, contribute towards this expense
by taxes of different kinds; it seems to have been very commonly
stipulated, that no present for the administration of justice
should, under any pretence, be accepted either by the sovereign,
or by his bailiffs and substitutes, the judges. Those presents,
it seems to have been supposed, could more easily be abolished
altogether, than effectually regulated and ascertained. Fixed
salaries were appointed to the judges, which were supposed to
compensate to them the loss of whatever might have been their
share of the ancient emoluments of justice; as the taxes more
than compensated to the sovereign the loss of his. Justice was
then said to be administered gratis.

Justice, however, never was in reality administered gratis in any
country. Lawyers and attorneys, at least, must always be paid by
the parties; and if they were not, they would perform their duty
still worse than they actually perform it. The fees annually paid
to lawyers and attorneys, amount, in every court, to a much
greater sum than the salaries of the judges. The circumstance of
those salaries being paid by the crown, can nowhere much diminish
the necessary expense of a law-suit. But it was not so much to
diminish the expense, as to prevent the corruption of justice,
that the judges were prohibited from receiving my present or fee
from the parties.

The office of judge is in itself so very honourable, that men are
willing to accept of it, though accompanied with very small
emoluments.      The inferior office of justice of peace, though
attended with a good deal of trouble, and in most cases with no
emoluments at all, is an object of ambition to the greater part
of our country gentlemen. The salaries of all the different
judges, high and low, together with the whole expense of the
administration and execution of justice, even where it is not
managed with very good economy, makes, in any civilized country,
but a very inconsiderable part of the whole expense of
government.

The whole expense of justice, too, might easily be defrayed by
the fees of court ; and, without exposing the administration of
justice to any real hazard of corruption, the public revenue
might thus be entirely discharged from a certain, though perhaps
but a small incumbrance. It is difficult to regulate the fees of
court effectually, where a person so powerful as the sovereign is
to share in them and to derive any considerable part of his
revenue from them. It is very easy, where the judge is the
principal person who can reap any benefit from them. The law can
very easily oblige the judge to respect the regulation though it
might not always be able to make the sovereign respect it. Where
the fees of court are precisely regulated and ascertained where
they are paid all at once, at a certain period of every process,
into the hands of a cashier or receiver, to be by him distributed
in certain known proportions among the different judges after the
process is decided and not till it is decided ; there seems to be
no more danger of corruption than when such fees are prohibited
altogether. Those fees, without occasioning any considerable
increase in the expense of a law-suit, might be rendered fully
sufficient for defraying the whole expense of justice.     But
not being paid to the judges till the process was determined,
they might be some incitement to the diligence of the court in
examining and deciding it. In courts which consisted of a
considerable number of judges, by proportioning the share of each
judge to the number of hours and days which he had employed in
examining the process, either in the court, or in a committee, by
order of the court, those fees might give some encouragement to
the diligence of each particular judge. Public services are never
better performed, than when their reward comes only in
consequence of their being performed, and is proportioned to the
diligence employed in performing them.  In the different
parliaments of France, the fees of court (called epices and
vacations) constitute the far greater part of the emoluments of
the judges. After all deductions are made, the neat salary paid
by the crown to a counsellor or judge in the parliament of
Thoulouse. in rank and dignity the second parliament of the
kingdom, amounts only to 150 livres, about 6:11s. sterling
a-year. About seven years ago, that sum was in the same place the
ordinary yearly wages of a common footman. The distribuion of
these epices, too, is according to the diligence of the judges. A
diligent judge gains a comfortable, though moderate revenue, by
his office; an idle one gets little more than his salary.
Those parliaments are, perhaps, in many respects, not very
convenient courts of justice; but they have never been accused ;
they seem never even to have been suspected of corruption.

The fees of court seem originaliy to have been the principal
support of the different courts of justice in England.     Each
court endeavoured to draw to itself as much business as it could,
and was, upon that account, willing to take cognizance of many
suits which were not originally intended to fall under its
jurisdiction. The court of king's bench, instituted for the trial
of criminal causes only, took cognizance of civil suits; the
plaintiff pretending that the defendant, in not doing him
justice, had been guilty of some trespass or misdemeanour. The
court of exchequer, instituted for the levying of the king's
revenue, and for enforcing the payment of such debts only as were
due to the king, took cognizance of all other contract debts ;
the plantiff alleging that he could not pay the king, because the
defendant would not pay him. In consequence of such fictions, it
came, in many cases, to depend altogether upon the parties,
before what court they would choose to have their cause tried,
and each court endeavoured, by superior dispatch and
impartiality, to draw to itself as many causes as it could. The
present admirable constitution of the courts of justice in
England was, perhaps, originally, in a great measure, formed by
this emulation, which anciently took place between their
respective judges : each judge endeavouring to give, in his own
court, the speediest and most effectual remedy which the law
would admit, for every sort of injustice. Originally, the courts
of law gave damages only for breach of contract. The court of
chancery, as a court of conscience, first took upon it to enforce
the specific performance of agreements. When the breach of
contract consisted in the non-payment of money, the damage
sustained could be compensated in no other way than by ordering
payment, which was equivalent to a specific performance of the
agreement.     In such cases, therefore, the remedy of the courts
of law was sufficient.     It was not so in others. When the
tenant sued his lord for having unjustly outed him of his lease,
the damages which he recovered were by no means equivalent to the
possession of the land. Such causes, therefore, for some time,
went all to the court of chancery, to the no small loss of the
courts of law. It was to draw back such causes to themselves,
that the courts of law are said to have invented the artificial
and fictitious writ of ejectment, the most effectual remedy for
an unjust outer or dispossession of land.

A stamp-duty upon the law proceedings of each particular court,
to be levied by that court, and applied towards the maintenance
of the judges, and other officers belonging to it, might in the
same manner, afford a revenue sufficient for defraying the
expense of the administration of justice, without bringing any
burden upon the general revenue of the society. The judges,
indeed, might in this case, be under the temptation of
multiplying unnecessarily the proceedings upon every cause, in
order to increase, as much as possible, the produce of such a
stamp-duty. It has been the custom in modern Europe to regulate,
upon most occasions, the payment of the attorneys and clerks of
court according to the number of pages which they had occasion to
write; the court, however, requiring that each page should
contain so many lines, and each line so many words. In order to
increase their payment, the attorneys and clerks have contrived
to multiply words beyond all necessity, to the corruption of the
law language of, I believe, every court of justice in Europe.
A like temptation might, perhaps, occasion a like corruption in
the form of law proceedings.

But whether the administration of justice be so contrived as to
defray its own expense, or whether the judges be maintained by
fixed salaries paid to them from some other fund, it does not
seen necessary that the person or persons entrusted with the
executive power should be charged with the management of that
fund, or with the payment of those salaries. That fund might
arise from the rent of landed estates, the management of each
estate being entrusted to the particular court which was to be
maintained by it.     That fund might arise even from the
interest of a sum of money, the lending out of which might, in
the same manner, be entrusted to the court which was to be
maintained by it. A part, though indeed but a small part of the
salary of the judges of the court of session in Scotland, arises
from the interest of a sum of money. The necessary instability of
such a fund seems, however, to render it an improper one for the
maintenance of an institution which ought to last for ever.

The separation of the judicial from the executive power, seems
originally to have arisen from the increasing business of the
society, in consequence of its increasing improvement.      The
administration of justice became so laborious and so complicated
a duty, as to require the undivided attention of the person to
whom it was entrusted. The person entrusted with the executive
power, not having leisure to attend to the decision of private
causes himself, a deputy was appointed to decide them in his
stead. In the progress of the Roman greatness, the consul was too
much occupied with the political affairs of the state, to attend
to the administration of justice.     A praetor, therefore, was
appointed to administer it in his stead. In the progress of the
European monarchies, which were founded upon the ruins of the
Roman empire, the sovereigns and the great lords came universally
to consider the administration of justice as an office both too
laborious and too ignoble for them to execute in their own
persons. They universally, therefore, discharged themselves of
it, by appointing a deputy, bailiff or judge.

When the judicial is united to the executive power, it is scarce
possible that justice should not frequently be sacrificed to what
is vulgarly called politics.     The persons entrusted with the
great interests of the state may even without any corrupt views,
sometimes imagine it necessary to sacrifice to those interests
the rights of a private man. But upon the impartial
administration of justice depends the liberty of every
individual, the sense which he has of his own security. In order
to make every individual feel himself perfectly secure in the
possession of every right which belongs to him, it is not only
necessary that the judicial should be separated from the
executive power, but that it should be rendered as much as
possible independent of that power. The judge should not be
liable to be removed from his office according to the caprice of
that power. The regular payment of his salary should not depend
upon the good will, or even upon the good economy of that power.


PART    III.

Of the Expense of public Works and public Institutions.

The third and last duty of the sovereign or commonwealth, is that
of erecting and maintaining those public institutions and those
public works, which though they may be in the highest degree
advantageous to a great society, are, however, of such a nature,
that the profit could never repay the expense to any individual,
or small number of individuals; and which it, therefore, cannot
be expected that any individual, or small number of individuals,
should erect or maintain. The performance of this duty requires,
too, very different degrees of expense in the different periods
of society.

After the public institutions and public works necessary for the
defence of the socicty, and for the administration of justice,
both of which have already been mentioned, the other works and
institutions of this kind are chiefly for facilitating the
commerce of the society, and those for promoting the instruction
of the people. The institutions for instruction are of two kinds:
those for the education of the youth, and those for the
instruction of people of all ages. The consideration of the
manner in which the expense of those different sorts of public
works and institutions may be most properly defrayed will divide
this third part of the present chapter into three different
articles.

ARTICLE I. - Of the public Works and Institutions for
facilitating the Commerce of the Society.

And, first, of those which are necessary for facilitating
Commerce in general.

That the erection and maintenance of the public works which
facilitate the commerce of any country, such as good roads,
bridges, navigable canals, harbours, etc. must require very
different degrees of expense in the different periods of society,
is evident without any proof.     The expense of making and
maintaining the public roads of any country must evidently
increase with the annual produce of the land and labour of that
country, or with the quantity and weight of the goods which it
becomes necessary to fetch and carry upon those roads. The
strength of a bridge must be suited to the number and weight of
the carriages which are likely to pass over it. The depth and the
supply of water for a navigable canal must be proportioned to the
number and tonnage of the lighters which are likely to carry
goods upon it; the extent of a harbour, to the number of the
shipping which are likely to take shelter in it.

It does not seem necessary that the expense of those public works
should be defrayed from that public revenue, as it is commonly
called, of which the collection and application are in most
countries, assigned to the executive power. The greater part of
such public works may easily be so managed, as to afford a
particular revenue, sufficient for defraying their own expense
without bringing any burden upon the general revenue of the
society.

A highway, a bridge, a navigable canal, for example, may, in most
cases, be both made add maintained by a small toll upon the
carriages which make use of them ; a harbour, by a moderate
port-duty upon the tonnage of the shipping which load or unload
in it. The coinage, another institution for facilitating
commerce, in many countries, not only defrays its own expense,
but affords a small revenue or a seignorage to the sovereign. The
post-office, another institution for the same purpose, over and
above defraying its own expense, affords, in almost all
countries, a very considerable revenue to the sovereign.

When the carriages which pass over a highway or a bridge, and the
lighters which sail upon a navigable canal, pay toll in
proportion to their weight or their tonnage, they pay for the
maintenance of those public works exactly in proportion to the
wear and tear which they occasion of them. It seems scarce
possible to invent a more equitable way of maintaining such
works. This tax or toll, too, though it is advanced by the
carrier, is finally paid by the consumer, to whom it must always
be charged in the price of the goods. As the expense of carriage,
however, is very much reduced by means of such public works, the
goods, notwithstanding the toll, come cheaper to the consumer
than they could otherwise have done, their price not being so
much raised by the toll, as it is lowered by the cheapness of the
carriage. The person who finally pays this tax, therefore, gains
by the application more than he loses by the payment of it. His
payment is exactly in proportion to his gain. It is, in reality,
no more than a part of that gain which he is obliged to give up,
in order to get the rest.     It seems impossible to imagine a
more equitable method of raising a tax.

When the toll upon carriages of luxury, upon coaches,
post-chaises, etc. is made somewhat higher in proportion to their
weight, than upon carriages of necessary use, such as carts,
waggons, etc. the indolence and vanity of the rich is made to
contribute, in a very easy manner, to the relief of the poor, by
rendering cheaper the transportation of heavy goods to all the
different parts of the country.

When high-roads, bridges, canals, etc. are in this manner made
and supported by the commerce which is carried on by means of
them, they can be made only where that commerce requires them,
and, consequently, where it is proper to make them. Their
expense, too, their grandeur and magnificence, must be suited to
what that commerce can afford to pay. They must be made,
consequently, as it is proper to make them. A magnificent
high-road cannot be made through a desert country, where there is
little or no commerce, or merely because it happens to lead to
the country villa of the intendant of the province, or to that of
some great lord, to whom the intendant finds it convenient to
make his court. A great bridge cannot be thrown over a river at a
place where nobody passes, or merely to embellish the view from
the windows of a neighbouring palace ; things which sometimes
happen in countries, where works of this kind are carried on by
any other revenue than that which they themselves are capable of
affording.

In several different parts of Europe, the toll or lock-duty upon
a canal is the property of private persons, whose private
interest obliges them to keep up the canal. If it is not kept in
tolerable order, the navigation necessarily ceases altogether,
and, along with it, the whole profit which they can make by the
tolls. If those tolls were put under the management of
commissioners, who had themselves no interest in them, they might
be less attentive to the maintenance of the works which produced
them. The canal of Languedoc cost the king of France and the
province upwards of thirteen millions of livres, which (at
twenty-eight livres the mark of silver, the value of French money
in the end of the last century) amounted to upwards of nine
hundred thousand pounds sterling. When that great work was
finished, the most likely method, it was found, of keeping it in
constant repair, was to make a present of the tolls to Riquet,
the engineer who planned and conducted the work. Those tolls
constitute, at present, a very large estate to the different
branches of the family of that gentleman, who have, therefore, a
great interest to keep the work in constant repair. But had those
tolls been put under the management of commissioners, who had no
such interest, they might perhaps, have been dissipated in
ornamental and unnecessary expenses, while the most essential
parts of the works were allowed to go to ruin.

The tolls for the maintenance of a highroad cannot, with any
safety, be made the property of private persons. A high-road,
though entirely neglected, does not become altogether impassable,
though a canal does. The proprietors of the tolls upon a
high-road, therefore, might neglect altogether the repair of the
road, and yet continue to levy very nearly the same tolls. It is
proper, therefore, that the tolls for the maintenance of such a
work should be put under the managmnent of commissioners or
trustees.

In Great Britain, the abuses which the trustees have committed in
the management of those tolls, have, in many cases, been very
justly complained of. At many turnpikes, it has been said, the
money levied is more than double of what is necessary for
executing, in the completest manner, the work, which is often
executed in a very slovenly manner, and sometimes not executed at
all. The system of repairing the high-roads by tolls of this
kind, it must be observed, is not of very long standing. We
should not wonder, therefore, if it has not yet been brought to
that degree of perfection of which it seems capable. If mean and
improper persons are frequently appointed trustees ; and if
proper courts of inspection and account have not yet been
established for controlling their conduct, and for reducing the
tolls to what is barely sufficient for executing the work to be
done by them ; the recency of the institution both accounts and
apologizes for those defects, of which, by the wisdom of
parliament, the greater part may, in due time, be gradually
remedied.

The money levied at the different turnpikes in Great Britain, is
supposed to exceed so much what is necessary for repairing the
roads, that the savings which, with proper economy, might be made
from it, have been considered, even by some ministers, as a very
great resource, which might, at some time or another, be applied
to the exigencies of the state. Government, it has been said, by
taking the management of the turnpikes into its own hands, and by
employing the soldiers, who would work for a very small addition
to their pay, could keep the roads in good order, at a much less
expense than it can be done by trustees, who have no other
workmen to employ, but such as derive their whole subsistence
from their wages. A great revenue, half a million, perbaps {Since
publishing the two first editions of this book, I have got good
reasons to believe that all the turnpike tolls levied in Great
Britain do not procduce a neat revenue that amounts to half a
million ; a sum which, under the management of government, would
not be sufficient to keep, in repair five of the principal roads
in the kingdom}, it has been pretended, might in this manner be
gained, without laying any new burden upon the people; and the
turnpike roads might be made to contribute to the general expense
of the state, in the same manner as the post-office does at
present.

That a considerable revenue might be gained in this manner, I
have no doubt, though probably not near so much as the projectors
of this plan have supposed. The plan itself, however, seems
liable to several very important objections.

First, If the tolls which are levied at the turnpikes should ever
be considered as one of the resources for supplying the
exigencies of the state, they would certainly be augmented as
those exigencies were supposed to require. According to the
policy of Great Britain, therefore, they would probably he
augmented very fast. The facility with which a great revenue
could be drawn from them, would probably encourage administration
to recur very frequently te this resource. Though it may,
perhaps, be more than doubtful whether half a million could by
any economy be saved out of the present tolls, it can scarcely be
doubted, but that a million might be saved out of them, if they
were doubled ; and perhaps two millions, if they were tripled {I
have now good reason to believe that all these conjectural sums
are by much too large.}. This great revenue, too, might be levied
without the appointment of a single new officer to collect and
receive it. But the turnpike tolls, being continually augmented
in this manner, instead of facilitating the inland commerce of
the country, as at present, would soon become a very great
incumbrance upon it. The expense of transporting all heavy goods
from one part of the country to another, would soon be so much
increased, the market for all such goods, consequently, would
soon be so much narrowed, that their production would be in a
great measure discouraged, and the most important branches of the
domestic industry of the country annihilated altogether.

Secondly, A tax upon carriages, in proportion to their weight,
though a very equal tax when applied to the sole purpose of
repairing the roads, is a very unequal one when applied to any
other purpose, or to supply the common exigencies of the state.
When it is applied to the sole purpose above mentioned, each
carriage is supposed to pay exactly for the wear and tear which
that carriage occasions of the roads. But when it is applied to
any other purpose, each carriage is supposed to pay for more than
that wear and tear, and contributes to the supply of some other
exigency of the state. But as the turnpike toll raises the price
of goods in proportion to their weight and not to their value, it
is chiefly paid by the consumers of coarse and bulky, not by
those of precious and light commodities. Whatever exigency of the
state, therefore, this tax might be intended to supply, that
exigency would be chiefly supplied at the expense of the poor,
not of the rich; at the expense of those who are least able to
supply it, not of those who are most able.

Thirdly, If government should at any time neglect the reparation
of the high-roads, it would be still more difficult, than it is
at present, to compel the proper application of any part of the
turnpike tolls. A large revenue might thus be levied upon the
people, without any part of it being applied to the only purpose
to which a revenue levied in this manner ought ever to be
applied. If the meanness and poverty of the trustees of turnpike
roads render it sometimes difficult, at present, to oblige them
to repair their wrong ; their wealth and greatness would render
it ten times more so in the case which is here supposed.

In France, the funds destined for the reparation of the
high-roads are under the immediate direction of the executive
power. Those funds consist, partly in a certain number of days
labour, which the country people are in most parts of Europe
obliged to give to the reparation of the highways; and partly in
such a portion of the general revenue of the state as the king
chooses to spare from his other expenses.

By the ancient law of France, as well as by that of most other
parts of Europe, the labour of the country people was under the
direction of a local or provincial magistracy, which had no
immediate dependency upon the king's council.     But, by the
present practice, both the labour of the country people, and
whatever other fund the king may choose to assign for the
reparation of the high-roads in any particular province or
generality, are entirely under the management of the intendant ;
an officer who is appointed and removed by the king's council who
receives his orders from it, and is in constant correspondence
with it. In the progress of despotism, the authority of the
executive power gradually absorbs that of every other power in
the state, and assumes to itself the management of every branch
of revenue which is destined for any public purpose. In France,
however, the great post-roads, the roads which make the
communication between the principal towns of the kingdom, are in
general kept in good order; and, in some provinces, are even a
good deal superior to the greater part of the turnpike roads of
England. But what we call the cross roads, that is, the far
greater part of the roads in the country, are entirely neglected,
and are in many places absolutely impassable for any heavy
carriage. In some places it is even dangerous to travel on
horseback, and mules are the only conveyance which can safely be
trusted. The proud minister of an ostentatious court, may
frequently take pleasure in executing a work of splendour and
magnificence, such as a great highway, which is frequently seen
by the principal nobility, whose applauses not only flatter his
vanity, but even contribute to support his interest at court. But
to execute a great number of little works, in which nothing that
can be done can make any great appearance, or excite the smallest
degree of admiration in any traveller, and which, in short, have
nothing to recommend them but their extreme utility, is a
business which appears, in every respect, too mean and paltry to
merit the attention of so great a magistrate. Under such an
administration therefore, such works are almost always entirely
neglected.

In China, and in several other governments of Asia, the executive
power charges itself both with the reparation of the high-roads,
and with the maintenance of the navigable canals. In the
instructions which are given to the governor of each province,
those objects, it is said, are constantly recommended to him, and
the judgment which the court forms of his conduct is very much
regulated by the attention which he appears to have paid to this
part of his instructions.     This branch of public police,
accordingly, is said to be very much attended to in all those
countries, but particularly in China, where the high-roads, and
still more the navigable canals, it is pretended, exceed very
much every thing of the same kind which is known in Europe. The
accounts of those works, however, which have been transmitted to
Europe, have generally been drawn up by weak and wondering
travellers; frequently by stupid and lying missionaries. If they
had been examined by more intelligent eyes, and if the accounts
of them had been reported by more faithful witnesses, they would
not, perhaps, appear to be so wonderful. The account which
Bernier gives of some works of this kind in Indostan, falls very
short of what had been reported of them by other travellers, more
disposed to the marvellous than he was. It may too, perhaps, be
in those countries, as it is in France, where the great roads,
the great communications, which are likely to be the subjects of
conversation at the court and in the capital, are attended to,
and all the rest neglected. In China, besides, in Indostan, and
in several other governments of Asia, the revenue of the
sovereign arises almost altogether from a land tax or land rent,
which rises or falls with the rise and fall of the annual produce
of the land. The great interest of the sovereign, therefore, his
revenue, is in such countries necessarily and immediately
connected with the cultivation of the land, with the greatness of
its produce, and with the value of its produce. But in order to
render that produce both as great and as valuable as possible, it
is necessary to procure to it as extensive a market as possible,
and consequently to establish the freest, the easiest, and the
least expensive communication between all the different parts of
the country; which can be done only by means of the best roads
and the best navigable canals. But the revenue of the sovereign
does not, in any part of Europe, arise chiefly from a land tax or
land rent.     In all the great kingdoms of Europe, perhaps, the
greater part of it may ultimately depend upon the produce of the
land: but that dependency is neither so immediate nor so evident.
In Europe, therefore, the sovereign does not feel himself so
directly called upon to promote the increase, both in quantity
and value of the produce of the land, or, by maintaining good
roads and canals, to provide the most extensive market for that
produce.     Though it should be true, therefore, what I
apprehend is not a little doubtful, that in some parts of Asia
this department of the public police is very properly managed by
the executive power, there is not the least probability that,
during the present state of things, it could be tolerably managed
by that power in any part of Europe.

Even those public works, which are of such a nature that they
cannot afford any revenue for maintaining themselves, but of
which the convecniency is nearly confined to some particular
place or district, are always better maintained by a local or
provincial revenue, under the management of a local and
provincial administration, than by the general revenue of the
state, of which the executive power must always have the
management. Were the streets of London to be lighted and paved at
the expense of the treasury, is there any probability that they
would be so well lighted and paved as they are at present, or
even at so small an expense ? The expense, besides, instead of
being raised by a local tax upon the inhabitants of each
particular street, parish, or district in London, would, in this
case, be defrayed out of the general revenue of the state, and
would consequently be raised by a tax upon all the inhabitants of
the kingdom, of whom the greater part derive no sort of benefit
from the lighting and paving of the streets of London.

The abuses which sometimes creep into the local and provincial
administration of a local and provincial revenue, how enormous
soever they may appear, are in reality, however, almost always
very trifling in comparison of those which commonly take place in
the administration and expenditure of the revenue of a great
empire. They are, besides, much more easily corrected. Under the
local or provincial administration of the justices of the peace
in Great Britain, the six days labour which the country people
are obliged to give to the reparation of the highways, is not
always, perhaps, very judiciously applied, but it is scarce ever
exacted with any circumstance of cruelty or oppression. In
France, under the administration of the intendants, the
application is not always more judicious, and the exaction is
frequently the most cruel and oppressive. Such corvees, as they
are called, make one of the principal instruments of tyranny by
which those officers chastise any parish or communeaute, which
has had the misfortune to fall under their dspleasure.


Of the public Works and Institution which are necessary for
facilitating particular Branches of Commerce.

The object of the public works and institutions above mentioned,
is to facilitate commerce in general. But in order to facilitate
some particular branches of it, particular institutions are
necessary, which again require a particular and extraordinary
expense.

Some particular branches of commerce which are carried on with
barbarous and uncivilized nations, require extraordinary
protection.      An ordinary store or counting-house could give
little security to the goods of the merchants who trade to the
western coast of Africa. To defend them from the barbarous
natives, it is necessary that the place where they are deposited
should be in some measure fortified.      The disorders in the
government of Indostan have been supposed to render a like
precaution necessary, even among that mild and gentle people; and
it was under pretence of securing their persons and property from
violence, that both the English and French East India companies
were allowed to erect the first forts which they possessed in
that country. Among other nations, whose vigorous government will
suffer no strangers to possess any fortified place within their
territory, it may be necessary to maintain some ambassador,
minister, or consul, who may both decide, according to their own
customs, the differences arising among his own countrymen, and,
in their disputes with the natives, may by means of his public
character, interfere with more authority and afford them a more
powerful protection than they could expect from any private man.
The interests of commerce have frequently made it necessary to
maintain ministers in foreign countries, where the purposes
either of war or alliance would not have required any. The
commerce of the Turkey company first occasioned the establishment
of an ordinary ambassador at Constantinople. The first English
embassies to Russia arose altogether from commercial interests.
The constant interference with those interests, necessarily
occasioned between the subjects of the different states of
Europe, has probably introduced the custom of keeping, in all
neighbouring countries, ambassadors or ministers constantly
resident, even in the time of peace. This custom, unknown to
ancient times, seems not to be older than the end of the
fifteenth, or beginning of the sixteenth century; that is, than
the time when commerce first began to extend itself to the
greater part of the nations of Europe, and when they first began
to attend to its interests.

It seems not unreasonable, that the extraordinary expense which
the protection of any particular branch of commerce may occasion,
should be defrayed by a moderate tax upon that particular branch;
by a moderate fine, for example, to be paid by the traders when
they first enter into it; or, what is more equal, by a particular
duty of so much per cent. upon the goods which they either import
into, or export out of, the particular countries with which it is
carried on. The protection of trade, in general, from pirates and
freebooters, is said to have given occasion to the first
institution of the duties of customs. But, if it was thought
reasonable to lay a general tax upon trade, in order to defray
the expense of protecting trade in general, it should seem
equally reasonable to lay a particular tax upon a particular
branch of trade, in order to defray the extraordinary expense of
protecting that branch.

The protection of trade, in general, has always been considered
as essential to the defence of the commonwealth, and, upon that
account, a necessary part of the duty of the executive power. The
collection and application of the general duties of customs,
therefore, have always been left to that power. But the
protection of any particular branch of trade is a part of the
general protection of trade; a part, therefore, of the duty of
that power; and if nations always acted consistently, the
particular duties levied for the purposes of such particular
protection, should always have been left equally to its disposal.
But in this respect, as well as in many others, nations have not
always acted consistently; and in the greater part of the
commercial states of Europe, particular companies of merchants
have had the address to persuade the legislature to entrust to
them the performance of this part of the duty of the sovereign,
together with all the powers which are necessarily connected with
it.

These companies, though they may, perhaps, have been useful for
the first introduction of some branches of commerce, by making,
at their own expense, an experiment which the state might not
think it prudent to make, have in the long-run proved,
universally, either burdensome or useless, and have either
mismanaged or confined the trade.

When those companies do not trade upon a joint stock, but are
obliged to admit any person, properly qualified, upon paying a
certain fine, and agreeing to submit to the regulations of the
company, each member trading upon his own stock, and at his own
risk, they are called regulated companies. When they trade upon a
joint stock, each member sharing in the common profit or loss, in
proportion to his share in this stock, they are called
joint-stock companies. Such companies, whether regulated or
joint-stock, sometimes have, and sometimes have not, exclusive
privileges.

Regulated companies resemble, in every respect, the corporation
of trades, so common in the cities and towns of all the different
countries of Europe; and are a sort of enlarged monopolies of the
same kind. As no inhabitant of a town can exercise an
incorporated trade, without first obtaining his freedom in the
incorporation, so, in most cases, no subject of the state can
lawfully carry on any branch of foreign trade, for which a
regulated company is established, without first becoming a member
of that company. The monopoly is more or less strict, according
as the terms of admission are more or less difficult, and
according as the directors of the company have more or less
authority, or have it more or less in their power to manage in
such a manner as to confine the greater part of the trade to
themselves and their particular friends. In the most ancient
regulated companies, the privileges of apprenticeship were the
same as in other corporations, and entitled the person who had
served his time to a member of the company, to become himself a
member, either without paying any fine, or upon paying a much
smaller one than what was exacted of other people. The usual
corporation spirit, wherever the law does not restrain it,
prevails in all regulated companies. When they have been allowed
to act according to their natural genius, they have always, in
order to confine the competition to as small a number of persons
as possible, endeavoured to subject the trade to many burdensome
regulations. When the law has restrained them from doing this,
they have become altogether useless and insignificant.

The regulated companies for foreign commerce which at present
subsist in Great Britain, are the ancient merchant-adventurers
company, now commonly called the Hamburgh company, the Russia
company, the Eastland company, the Turkey company, and the
African company.

The terms of admission into the Hamburgh company are now said to
be quite easy ; and the directors either have it not in their
power to subject the trade to any troublesome restraint or
regulations, or, at least, have not of late exercised that power.
It has not always been so. About the middle of the last century,
the fine for admission was fifty, and at one time one hundred
pounds, and the conduct of the company was said to be extremely
oppressive. In l643, in 1645, and in 1661, the clothiers and free
traders of the west of England complained of them to parliament,
as of monopolists, who confined the trade, and oppressed the
manufactures of the country. Though those complaints produced no
act of parliament, they had probably intimidated the company so
far, as to oblige them to reform their conduct. Since that time,
at least, there have been no complaints against them. By the 10th
and 11th of William III. c.6, the fine for admission into the
Russia company was reduced to five pounds; and by the 25th of
Charles II. c.7, that for admission into the Eastland company to
forty shillings ; while, at the same time, Sweden, Denmark, and
Norway, all the countries on the north side of the Baltic, were
exempted from their exclusive charter. The conduct of those
companies had probably given occasion to those two acts of
parliament.     Before that time, Sir Josiah Child had
represented both these and the Hamburgh company as extremely
oppressive, and imputed to their bad management the low state of
the trade, which we at that time carried on to the countries
comprehended within their respective charters. But though such
companies may not, in the present times, be very oppressive, they
are certainly altogether useless. To be merely useless, indeed,
is perhaps, the highest eulogy which can ever justly be bestowed
upon a regulated company; and all the three companies above
mentioned seem, in their present state, to deserve this eulogy.

The fine for admission into the Turkey company was formerly
twenty-five pounds for all persons under twenty-six years of age,
and fifty pounds for all persons above that age. Nobody but mere
merchants could be admitted; a restriction which excluded all
shop-keepers and retailers. By a bye-law, no British manufactures
could be exported to Turkey but in the general ships of the
company; and as those ships sailed always from the port of
London, this restriction confined the trade to that expensive
port, and the traders to those who lived in London and in its
neighbourhood. By another bye-law, no person living within twenty
miles of London, and not free of the city, could be admitted a
member ; another restriction which, joined to the foregoing,
necessarily excluded all but the freemen of London. As the time
for the loading and sailing of those general ships depended
altogether upon the directors, they could easily fill them with
their own goods, and those of their particular friends, to the
exclusion of others, who, they might pretend, had made their
proposals too late. In this state of things, therefore, this
company was, in every respect, a strict and oppressive monopoly.
Those abuses gave occasion to the act of the 26th of George II.
c. 18, reducing the fine for admission to twenty pounds for all
persons, without any distinction of ages, or any restriction,
either to mere merchants, or to the freemen of London; and
granting to all such persons the liberty of exporting, from all
the ports of Great Britain, to any port in Turkey, all British
goods, of which the exportation was not prohibited, upon paying
both the general duties of customs, and the particular duties
assessed for defraying the necessary expenses of the company ;
and submitting, at the same time, to the lawful authority of the
British ambassador and consuls resident in Turkey, and to the
bye-laws of the company duly enacted. To prevent any oppression
by those bye-laws, it was by the same act ordained, that if any
seven members of the company conceived themselves aggrieved by
any bye-law which should be enacted after the passing of this
act, they might appeal to the board of trade and plantations (to
the authority of which a committee of the privy council has now
succeeded), provided such appeal was brought within twelve months
after the bye-law was enacted; and that, if any seven members
conceived themselves aggrieved by any bye-law which had been
enacted before the passing of this act, they might bring a like
appeal, provided it was within twelve months after the day on
which this act was to take place. The experience of one year,
however, may not always be sufficient to discover to all the
members of a great company the pernicious tendency of a
particular bye-law ; and if several of them should afterwards
discover it, neither the board of trade, nor the committee of
council, can afford them any redress. The object, besides, of the
greater part of the bye-laws of all regulated companies, as well
as of all other corporations, is not so much to oppress those who
are already members, as to discourage others from becoming so;
which may be done, not only by a high fine, but by many other
contrivances. The constant view of such companies is always to
raise the rate of their own profit as high as they can; to keep
the market, both for the goods which they export, and for those
which they import, as much understocked as they can ; which can
be done only by restraining the competition, or by discouraging
new adventurers from entering into the trade. A fine, even of
twenty pounds, besides, though it may not, perhaps, be sufficient
to discourage any man from entering into the Turkey trade, with
an intention to continue in it, may be enough to discourage a
speculative merchant from hazarding a single adventure in it. In
all trades, the regular established traders, even though not
incorporated, naturally combine to raise profits, which are noway
so likely to be kept, at all times, down to their proper level,
as by the occasional competition of speculative adventurers. The
Turkey trade, though in some measure laid open by this act of
parliament, is still considered by many people as very far from
being altogether free. The Turkey company contribute to maintain
an ambassador and two or three consuls, who, like other public
ministers, ought to be maintained altogether by the state, and
the trade laid open to all his majesty's subjects. The different
taxes levied by the company, for this and other corporation
purposes, might afford a revenue much more than sufficient to
enable a state to maintain such ministers.

Regulated companies, it was observed by Sir Josiah Child, though
they had frequently supported public ministers, had never
maintained any forts or garrisons in the countries to which they
traded; whereas joint-stock companies frequently had. And, in
reality, the former seem to be much more unfit for this sort of
service than the latter.     First, the directors of a regulated
company have no particular interest in the prosperity of the
general trade of the company, for the sake of which such forts
and garrisons are maintained. The decay of that general trade may
even frequently contribute to the advantage of their own private
trade; as, by diminishing the number of their competitors, it may
enable them both to buy cheaper, and to sell dearer. The
directors of a joint-stock company, on the contrary, having only
their share in the profits which are made upon the common stock
committed to their management, have no private trade of their
own, of which the interest can be separated from that of the
general trade of the company. Their private interest is connected
with the prosperity of the general trade of the company, and with
the maintenance of the forts and garrisons which are necessary
for its defence. They are more likely, therefore, to have that
continual and careful attention which that maintenance
necessarily requires. Secondly, The directors of a joint-stock
company have always the management of a large capital, the joint
stock of the company, a part of which they may frequently employ,
with propriety, in building, repairing, and maintaining such
necessary forts and garrisons. But the directors of a regulated
company, having the management of no common capital, have no
other fund to employ in this way, but the casual revenue arising
from the admission fines, and from the corporation duties imposed
upon the trade of the company. Though they had the same interest,
therefore, to attend to the maintenance of such forts and
garrisons, they can seldom have the same ability to render that
attention effectual. The maintenance of a public minister,
requiring scarce any attention, and but a moderate and limited
expense, is a business much more suitable both to the temper and
abilities of a regulated company.

Long after the time of Sir Josiah Child, however, in 1750, a
regulated company was established, the present company of
merchants trading to Africa ; which was expressly charged at
first with the maintenance of all the British forts and garrisons
that lie between Cape Blanc and the Cape of Good Hope, and
afterwards with that of those only which lie between Cape Rouge
and the Cape of Good Hope.     The act which establishes this
company (the 23rd of George II. c.51 ), seems to have had two
distinct objects in view; first, to restrain effectually the
oppressive and monopolizing spirit which is natural to the
directors of a regulated company ; and, secondly, to force them,
as much as possible, to give an attention, which is not natural
to them, towards the maintenance of forts and garrisons.

For the first of these purposes, the fine for admission is
limited to forty shillings. The company is prohibited from
trading in their corporate capacity, or upon a joint stock ; from
borrowing money upon common seal, or from laying any restraints
upon the trade, which may be carried on freely from all places,
and by all persons being British subjects, and paying the fine.
The government is in a committee of nine persons, who meet at
London, but who are chosen annually by the freemen of the company
at London, Bristol, and Liverpool ; three from each place. No
committeeman can be continued in office for more than three years
together. Any committee-man might be removed by the board of
trade and plantations, now by a committee of council, after being
heard in his own defence. The committee are forbid to export
negroes from Africa, or to import any African goods into Great
Britain. But as they are charged with the maintenance of forts
and garrisons, they may, for that purpose export from Great
Britain to Africa goods and stores of different kinds. Out of the
moneys which they shall receive from the company, they are
allowed a sum, not exceeding eight hundred pounds, for the
salaries of their clerks and agents at London, Bristol, and
Liverpool, the house-rent of their offices at London, and all
other expenses of management, commission, and agency, in England.
What remains of this sum, after defraying these different
expenses, they may divide among themselves, as compensation for
their trouble, in what manner they think proper. By this
constitution, it might have been expected, that the spirit of
monopoly would have been effectually restrained, and the first of
these purposes sufficiently answered. It would seem, however,
that it had not. Though by the 4th of George III. c.20, the fort
of Senegal, with all its dependencies, had been invested in the
company of merchants trading to Africa, yet, in the year
following (by the 5th of George III. c.44), not only Senegal and
its dependencies, but the whole coast, from the port of Sallee,
in South Barbary, to Cape Rouge, was exempted from the
jurisdiction of that company, was vested in the crown, and the
trade to it declared free to all his majesty's subjects. The
company had been suspected of restraining the trade and of
establishing some sort of improper monopoly. It is not, however,
very easy to conceive how, under the regulations of the 23d
George II. they could do so. In the printed debates of the house
of commons, not always the most authentic records of truth, I
observe, however, that they have been accused of this. The
members of the committee of nine being all merchants, and the
governors and factors in their different forts and settlements
being all dependent upon them, it is not unlikely that the latter
might have given peculiar attention to the consignments and
commissions of the former, which would establish a real monopoly.

For the second of these purposes, the maintenance of the forts
and garrisons, an annual sum has been allotted to them by
parliament, generally about 13,000. For the proper application
of this sum, the committee is obliged to account annually to the
cursitor baron of exchequer; which account is afterwards to be
laid before parliament. But parliament, which gives so little
attention to the application of millions, is not likely to give
much to that of 13,000 a-year; and the cursitor baron of
exchequer, from his profession and education, is not likely to be
profoundly skilled in the proper expense of forts and garrisons.
The captains of his majesty's navy, indeed, or any other
commissioned officers, appointed by the board of admiralty, may
inquire into the condition of the forts and garrisons, and report
their observations to that board. But that board seems to have no
direct jurisdiction over the committee, nor any authority to
correct those whose conduct it may thus inquire into; and the
captains of his majesty's navy, besides, are not supposed to be
always deeply learned in the science of fortification. Removal
from an office, which can he enjoyed only for the term of three
years, and of which the lawful emoluments, even during that term,
are so very small, seems to be the utmost punishment to which any
committee-man is liable, for any fault, except direct
malversation, or embezzlement, either of the public money, or of
that of the company ; and the fear of the punishment can never be
a motive of sufficient weight to force a continual and careful
attention to a business to which he has no other interest to
attend. The committee are accused of having sent out bricks and
stones from England for the reparation of Cape Coast Castle, on
the coast of Guinea ; a business for which parliament had several
times granted an extraordinary sum of money. These bricks and
stones, too, which had thus been sent upon so long a voyage, were
said to have been of so bad a quality, that it was necessary to
rebuild, from the foundation, the walls which had been repaired
with them. The forts and garrisons which lie north of Cape Rouge,
are not only maintained at the expense of the state, but are
under the immediate government of the executive power ; and why
those which lie south of that cape, and which, too, are, in part
at least, maintained at the expense of the state, should be under
a different government, it seems not very easy even to imagine a
good reason. The protection of the Mediterranean trade was the
original purpose or pretence of the garrisons of Gibraltar and
Minorca ; and the maintenance and government of those garrisons
have always been, very properly, committed, not to the Turkey
company, but to the executive power. In the extent of its
dominion consists, in a great measure, the pride and dignity of
that power ; and it is not very likely to fail in attention to
what is necessary for the defence of that dominion. The garrisons
at Gibraltar and Minorca, accordingly, have never been neglected.
Though Minorca has been twice taken, and is now probably lost for
ever, that disaster has never been imputed to any neglect in the
executive power. I would not, however, be understood to
insinuate, that either of those expensive garrisons was ever,
even in the smallest degree, necessary for the purpose for which
they were originally dismembered from the Spanish monarchy. That
dismemberment, perhaps, never served any other real purpose than
to alienate from England her natural ally the king of Spain, and
to unite the two principal branches of the house of Bourbon in a
much stricter and more permanent alliance than the ties of blood
could ever have united them.

Joint-stock companies, established either by royal charter, or by
act of parliament, are different in several respects, not only
from regulated companies, but from private copartneries.

First, In a private copartnery, no partner without the consent of
the company, can transfer his share to another person, or
introduce a new member into the company. Each member, however,
may, upon proper warning, withdraw from the copartnery, and
demand payment from them of his share of the common stock. In a
joint-stock company, on the contrary, no member can demand pay
ment of his share from the company; but each member can, without
their consent, transfer his share to another person, and thereby
introduce a new member. The value of a share in a joint stock is
always the price which it will bring in the market ; and this may
be either greater or less in any proportion, than the sum which
its owner stands credited for in the stock of the company.

Secondly, In a private copartnery, each partner is bound for the
debts contracted by the company, to the whole extent of his
fortune. In a joint-stock company, on the contrary, each partner
is bound only to the extent of his share.

The trade of a joint-stock company is always managed by a court
of directors. This court, indeed, is frequently subject, in many
respects, to the control of a general court of proprietors.
But the greater part of these proprietors seldom pretend to
understand any thing of the business of the company; and when the
spirit of faction happens not to prevail among them, give
themselves no trouble about it, but receive contentedly such
halfyearly or yearly dividend as the directors think proper to
make to them. This total exemption front trouble and front risk,
beyond a limited sum, encourages many people to become
adventurers in joint-stock companies, who would, upon no account,
hazard their fortunes in any private copartnery. Such companies,
therefore, commonly draw to themselves much greater stocks, than
any private copartnery can boast of. The trading stock of the
South Sea company at one time amounted to upwards of thirty-three
millions eight hundred thousand pounds.     The divided capital
of the Bank of England amounts, at present, to ten millions seven
hundred and eighty thousand pounds. The directors of such
companies, however, being the managers rather of other people's
money than of their own, it cannot well be expected that they
should watch over it with the same anxious vigilance with which
the partners in a private coparnery frequently watch over their
own. Like the stewards of a rich man, they are apt to consider
attention to small matters as not for their master's honour, and
very easily give themselves a dispensation from having it.
Negligence and profusion, therefore, must always prevail, more or
less, in the management of the affairs of such a company. It is
upon this account, that joint-stock companies for foreign trade
have seldom been able to maintain the competition against private
adventurers. They have, accordingly, very seldom succeeded
without an exclusive privilege ; and frequently have not
succeeded with one. Without an exclusive privilege, they have
commonly mismanaged the trade.  With an exclusive privilege, they
have both mismanaged and confined it.
  The Royal African company, the predecessors of the present
African company, had an exclusive privilege by charter ; but as
that charter had not been confirmed by act of parliament, the
trade, in consequence of the declaration of rights, was, soon
after the Revolution, laid open to all his majesty's subjects.
The Hudson's Bay company are, as to their legal rights, in the
same situation as the Royal African company.     Their exclusive
charter has not been confirmed by act of parliament. The South
Sea company, as long as they continued to be a trading company,
had an exclusive privilege confirmed by act of parliament; as
have likewise the present united company of merchants trading to
the East Indies.

The Royal African company soon found that they could not maintain
the competition against private adventurers, whom,
notwithstanding the declaration of rights, they continued for
some time to call interlopers, and to persecute as such. In 1698,
however, the private adventurers were subjected to a duty of ten
per cent. upon almost all the different branches of their trade,
to be employed by the company in the maintenance of their forts
and garrisons.   But, notwithstanding this heavy tax, the company
were still unable to maintain the competition.  Their stock and
credit gradually declined. In 1712, their debts had become so
great, that a particular act of parliament was thought necessary,
both for their security and for that of their creditors. It was
enacted, that the resolution of two-thirds of these creditors in
number and value should bind the rust, both with regard to the
time which should be allowed to the company for the payment of
their debts, and with regard to any other agreement which it
might be thought proper to make with them concerning those debts.
In 1730, their affairs were in so great disorder, that they were
altogether incapable of maintaining their forts and garrisons,
the sole purpose and pretext of their institution.     From that
year till their final dissolution, the parliament judged it
necessary to allow the annual sum of 10,000 for that purpose.
In 1732, after having been for many years losers by the trade of
carrying negroes to the West Indies, they at last resolved to
give it up altogether ; to sell to the private traders to America
the negroes which they purchased upon the coast; awl to employ
their servants in a trade to the inland parts of Africa for gold
dust, elephants teeth, dyeing drugs, etc. But their success in
this more confined trade was not greater than in their former
extensive one.      Their affairs continued to go gradually to
decline, till at last, being in every respect a bankrupt company,
they were dissolved by act of parliament, and their forts and
garrisons vested in the present regulated company of merchants
trading to Africa. Before the erection of the Royal African
company, there had been three other joint-stock companies
successively established, one after another, for the African
trade. They were all equally unsuccessful. They all, however, had
exclusive charters, which, though not confirmed by act of
parliament, were in those days supposed to convey a real
exclusive privilege.

The Hudson's Bay company, before their misfortunes in the late
war, had been much more fortunate than the Royal African company.
Their necessary expense is much smaller. The whole number of
people whom they maintain in their different settlements and
habitations, which they have honoured with the name of forts, is
said not to exceed a hundred and twenty persons. This number,
however, is sufficient to prepare beforehand the cargo of furs
and other goods necessary for loading their ships, which, on
account of the ice, can seldom remain above six or eight weeks in
those seas. This advantage of having a cargo ready prepared,
could not, for several years, be acquired by private adventurers
; and without it there seems to be no possibility of trading to
Hudson's Bay. The moderate capital of the company, which, it is
said, does not exceed one hundred and ten thousand pounds, may,
besides, be sufficient to enable them to engross the whole, or
almost the whole trade and surplus produce, of the miserable
though extensive country comprehended within their charter. No
private adventurers, accordingly, have ever attempted to trade to
that country in competition with them. This company, therefore,
have always enjoyed an exclusive trade, in fact, though they may
have no right to it in law. Over and above all this, the moderate
capital of this company is said to be divided among a very small
number of proprietors. But a joint-stock company, consisting of a
small number of proprietors, with a moderate capital, approaches
very nearly to the nature of a private copartnery, and may be
capable of nearly the same degree of vigilance and attention. It
is not to be wondered at, therefore, if, in consequence of these
different advantages, the Hudson's Bay company had, before the
late war, been able to carry on their trade with a considerable
degree of success. It does not seem probable, however, that their
profits ever approached to what the late Mr Dobbs imagined them.
A much more sober and judicious writer, Mr Anderson, author of
the Historical and Chronological Deduction of Commerce, very
justly observes, that upon examining the accounts which Mr Dobbs
himself has given for several years together, of their exports
and imports, and upon making proper allowances for their
extraordinary risk and expense, it does not appear that their
profits deserve to be envied, or that they can much, if at all,
exceed the ordinary profits of trade.

The South Sea company never had any forts or garrisons to
maintain, and therefore were entirely exempted from one great
expense, to which other joint-stock companies for foreign trade
are subject; but they had an immense capital divided among an
immense number of proprietors. It was naturally to be expected,
therefore, that folly, negligence, and profusion, should prevail
in the whole management of their affairs. The knavery and
extravagance of their stock-jobbing projects are sufficiently
known, and the explication of them would be foreign to the
present subject. Their mercantile projects were not much better
conducted. The first trade which they engaged in, was that of
supplying the Spanish West Indies with negroes, of which (in
consequence of what was called the Assiento Contract granted them
by the treaty of Utrecht) they had the exclusive privilege. But
as it was not expected that much profit could be made by this
trade, both the Portuguese and French companies, who had enjoyed
it upon the same terms before them, having been ruined by it,
they were allowed, as compensation, to send annually a ship of
acertain burden, to trade directly to the Spanish West Indies. Of
the ten voyages which this annual ship was allowed to make, they
are said to have gained considerably by one, that of the Royal
Caroline, in 1731 ; and to have been losers, more or less, by
almost all the rest. Their ill success was imputed, by their
factors and agents, to the extortion and oppression of the
Spanish government ; but was, perhaps, principally owing to the
profusion and depredations of those very factors and agents; some
of whom are said to have acquired great fortunes, even in one
year. In 1734, the company petitioned the king, that they might
be allowed to dispose of the trade and tonnage of their annual
ship, on account of the little profit which they made by it, and
to accept of such equivalent as they could obtain from the king
of Spain.

In 1724, this company had undertaken the whale fishery. Of this,
indeed, they had no monopoly ; but as long as they carried it on,
no other British subjects appear to have engaged in it. Of the
eight voyages which their ships made to Greenland, they were
gainers by one, and losers by all the rest. After their eighth
and last voyage, when they had sold their ships, stores, and
utensils, they found that their whole loss upon this branch,
capital and interest included, amounted to upwards of 237,000.

In 1722, this company petitioned the parliament to be allowed to
divide their immense capital of more than thirty-three millions
eight hundred thousand pounds, the whole of which had been lent
to government, into two equal parts; the one half, or upwards of
16,900,000, to be put upon the same footing with other
government annuities, and not to be subject to the debts
contracted, or losses incurred, by the directors of the company,
in the prosecution of their mercantile projects ; the other half
to remain as before, a trading stock, and to be subject to those
debts and losses. The petition was too reasonable not to be
granted. In 1733, they again petitioned the parliament, that
three-fourths of their trading stock might be turned into annuity
stock, and only one-fourth remain as trading stock, or exposed to
the hazards arising from the bad management of their directors.
Both their annuity and trading stocks had, by this time, been
reduced more than two millions each, by several different
payments from government ; so that this fourth amounted only to
3,662,784:8:6. In 1748, all the demands of the company upon the
king of Spain, in consequence of the assiento contract, were, by
the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle, given up for what was supposed an
equivalent. An end was put to their trade with the Spanish West
Indies; the remainder of their trading stock was turned into an
annuity stock ; and the company ceased, in every respect, to be a
trading company.

It ought to be observed, that in the trade which the South Sea
company carried on by means of their annual ship, the only trade
by which it ever was expected that they could make any
considerable profit, they were not without competitors, either in
the foreign or in the home market. At Carthagena, Porto Bello,
and La Vera Cruz, they had to encounter the competition of the
Spanish merchants, who brought from Cadiz to those markets
European goods, of the same kind with the outward cargo of their
ship ; and in England they had to encounter that of the English
merchants, who imported from Cadiz goods of the Spanish West
Indies, of the same kind with the inward cargo. The goods, both
of the Spanish and English merchants, indeed, were, perhaps,
subject to higher duties. But the loss occasioned by the
negligence, profusion, and malversation of the servants of the
company, had probably been a tax much heavier than all those
duties. That a joint-stock company should be able to carry on
successfully any branch of foreign trade, when private
adventurers can come into any sort of open and fair competition
with them, seems contrary to all experience.

The old English East India company was established in 1600, by a
charter from Queen Elizabeth. In the first twelve voyages which
they fitted out for India, they appear to have traded as a
regulated company, with separate stocks, though only in the
general ships of the company. In 1612, they united into a joint
stock.     Their charter was exclusive, and, though not confirmed
by act of parliament, was in those days supposed to convey a real
exclusive privilege. For many years, therefore, they were not
much disturbed by interlopers. Their capital, which never
exceeded 744,000, and of which 50 was a share, was not so
exorbitant, nor their dealings so extensive, as to afford either
a pretext for gross negligence and profusion, or a cover to gross
malversation. Notwithstanding some extraordinary losses,
occassioned partly by the malice of the Dutch East India company,
and partly by other accidents, they carried on for many years a
successful trade. But in process of time, when the principles of
liberty were better understood, it became every day more and more
doubtful, how far a royal charter, not confirmed by act of
parliament, could convey an exclusive privilege. Upon this
question the decisions of the courts of justice were not uniform,
but varied with the authority of government, and the humours of
the times.     Interlopers multiplied upon them; and towards the
end of the reign of Charles II., through the whole of that of
James II., and during a part of that of William III., reduced
them to great distress. In 1698, a proposal was made to
parliament, of advancing two millions to government, at eight per
cent. provided the subscribers were erected into a new East India
company, with exclusive privileges. The old East India company
offered seven hundred thousand pounds, nearly the amount of their
capital, at four per cent. upon the same conditions. But such was
at that time the state of public credit, that it was more
convenient for government to borrow two millions at eight per
cent. than seven hundred thousand pounds at four. The proposal of
the new subscribers was accepted, and a new East India company
established in consequence. The old East India company, however,
had a right to continue their trade till 1701. They had, at the
same time, in the name of their treasurer, subscribed very
artfully three hundred and fifteen thousand pounds into the stock
of the new. By a negligence in the expression of the act of
parliament, which vested the East India trade in the subscribers
to this loan of two millions, it did not appear evident that they
were all obliged to unite into a joint stock. A few private
traders, whose subscriptions amounted only to seven thousand two
hundred pounds, insisted upon the privilege of trading separately
upon their own stocks, and at their own risks. The old East India
company had a right to a separate trade upon their own stock till
1701 ; and they had likewise, both before and after that period,
a right, like that or other private traders, to a separate trade
upon the 315,000, which they had subscribed into the stock of
the new company. The competition of the two companies with the
private traders, and with one another, is said to have well nigh
ruined both. Upon a subsequent occasion, in 1750, when a proposal
was made to parliament for putting the trade under the management
of a regulated company, and thereby laying it in some measure
open, the East India company, in opposition to this proposal,
represented, in very strong terms, what had been, at this time,
the miserable effects, as they thought them, of this competition.
In India, they said, it raised the price of goods so high, that
they were not worth the buying ; and in England, by overstocking
the market, it sunk their price so low, that no profit could be
made by them. That by a more plentiful supply, to the great
advantage and conveniency of the public, it must have reduced
very much the price of India goods in the English market, cannot
well be doubted; but that it should have raised very much their
price in the Indian market, seems not very probable, as all the
extraordinary demand which that competition could occasion must
have been but as a drop of water in the immense ocean of Indian
commerce. The increase of demand, besides, though in the
beginning it may sometimes raise the price of goods, never fails
to lower it in the long-run. It encourages production, and
thereby increases the competition of the producers, who, in order
to undersell one another, have recourse to new divisions or
labour and new improvements of art, which might never otherwise
have been thought of.     The miserable effects of which the
company complained, were the cheapness of consumption, and the
encouragement given to production ; precisely the two effects
which it is the great business of political economy to promote.
The competition, however, of which they gave this doleful
account, had not been allowed to be of long continuance. In 1702,
the two companies were, in some measure, united by an indenture
tripartite, to which the queen was the third party ; and in 1708,
they were by act of parliament, perfectly consolidated into one
company, by their present name of the United Company of Merchants
trading to the East Indies. Into this act it was thought worth
while to insert a clause, allowing the separate traders to
continue their trade till Michaelmas 1711 ; but at the same time
empowering the directors, upon three years notice, to redeem
their little capital of seven thousand two hundred pounds, and
thereby to convert the whole stock of the company into a joint
stock. By the same act, the capital of the company, in
consequence of a new loan to government, was augmented from two
millions to three millions two hundred thousand pounds. In 1743,
the company advanced another million to government. But this
million being raised, not by a call upon the proprietors, but by
selling annuities and contracting bond-debts, it did not augment
the stock upon which the proprietors could claim a dividend. It
augmented, however, their trading stock, it being equally liable
with the other three millions two hundred thousand pounds, to the
losses sustained, and debts contracted by the company in
prosecution of their mercantile projects. From 1708, or at least
from 1711, this company, being delivered from all competitors,
and fully established in the monopoly of the English commerce to
the East Indies, carried on a succesful trade, and from their
profits, made annually a moderate dividend to their proprietors.
During the French war, which began in 1741, the ambition of Mr.
Dupleix, the French governor of Pondicherry, involved them in the
wars of the Carnatic, and in the politics of the Indian princes.
After many signal successes, and equally signal losses, they at
last lost Madras, at that time their principal settlement in
India. It was restored to them by the treaty of Aix-la-Chapelle;
and, about this time the spirit of war and conquest seems to have
taken possession of their servants in India, and never since to
have left them.      During the French war, which began in 1755,
their arms partook of the general good fortune of those of Great
Britain. They defended Madras, took Pondicherry, recovered
Calcutta, and acquired the revenues of a rich and extensive
territory, amounting, it was then said, to upwards of three
millions a-year.      They remained for several years in quiet
possession of this revenue; but in 1767, administration laid
claim to their territorial acquisitions, and the revenue arising
from them, as of right belonging to the crown ; and the company,
in compensation for this claim, agreed to pay to government
400,000 a-year. They had, before this, gradually augmented their
dividend from about six to ten per cent. ; that is, upon their
capital of three millions two hundred thousand pounds, they had
increased it by 128,000, or had raised it from one hundred and
ninety-two thousand to three hundred and twenty thousand pounds
a-year. They were attempting about this time to raise it still
further, to twelve and a-half per cent., which would have made
their annual payments to their proprietors equal to what they had
agreed to pay annually to government, or to 400,000 a-year. But
during the two years in which their agreement with government was
to take place, they were restrained from any further increase of
dividend by two successive acts of parliament, of which the
object was to enable them to make a speedier progress in the
payment of their debts, which were at this time estimated at
upwards of six or seven millions sterling. In 1769, they renewed
their agreement with government for five years more, and
stipulated, that during the course of that period, they should be
allowed gradually to increase their dividend to twelve and a-half
per cent; never increasing it, however, more than one per cent.
in one year. This increase of dividend, therefore, when it had
risen to its utmost height, could augment their annual payments,
to their proprietors and government together, but by 680,000 ,
beyond what they had been before their late territorial
acquisitions. What the gross revenue of those territorial
acquisitions was supposed to amount to, has already been
mentioned ; and by an account brought by the Cruttenden East
Indiaman in 1769, the neat revenue, clear of all deductions and
military charges, was stated at two millions forty-eight thousand
seven hundred and forty-seven pounds. They were said, at the same
time, to possess another revenue, arising partly from lands, but
chiefly from the customs established at their different
settlements, amounting to 439,000. The profits of their trade,
too, according to the evidence of their chairman before the house
of commons, amounted, at this time, to at least 400,000 a-year ;
according to that of their accountant, to at least 500,000;
according to the lowest account, at least equal to the highest
dividend that was to be paid to their proprietors. So great a
revenue might certainly have afforded an augmentation of
680,000 in their annual payments ; and, at the same time, have
left a large sinking fund, sufficient for the speedy reduction of
their debt. In 1773, however, their debts, instead of being
reduced, were augmented by an arrear to the treasury in the
payment of the four hundred thousand pounds ; by another to the
custom-house for duties unpaid; by a large debt to the bank, for
money borrowed; and by a fourth, for bills drawn upon them from
India, and wantonly accepted, to the amount of upwards of twelve
hundred thousand pounds. The distress which these accumulated
claims brought upon them, obliged them not only to reduce all at
once their dividend to six per cent. but to throw themselves upon
the mercy of govermnent, and to supplicate, first, a release from
the further payment of the stipulated 400,000 a-year ; and,
secondly, a loan of fourteen hundred thousand, to save them from
immediate bankruptcy. The great increase of their fortune had, it
seems, only served to furnish their servants with a pretext for
greater profusion, and a cover for greater malversation, than in
proportion even to that increase of fortune. The conduct of their
servants in India, and the general state of their affairs both in
India and in Europe, became the subject of a parliamentary
inquiry: in consequence of which, several very important
alterations were made in the constitution of their government,
both at home and abroad. In India, their principal settlements or
Madras, Bombay, and Calcutta, which had before been altogether
independent of one another, were subjected to a governor-general,
assisted by a council of four assessors, parliament assuming to
itself the first nomination of this governor and council, who
were to reside at Calcutta ; that city having now become, what
Madras was before, the most important of the English settlements
in India. The court of the Mayor of Calcutta, originally
instituted for the trial of mercantile causes, which arose in the
city and neighbourlood, had gradually extended its jurisdiction
with the extension of the empire. It was now reduced and confined
to the original purpose of its institution. Instead of it, a new
supreme court of judicature was established, consisting of a
chief justice and three judges, to be appointed by the crown. In
Europe, the qualification necessary to entitle a proprietor to
vote at their general courts was raisted, from five hundred
pounds, the original price of a share in the stock of the
company, to a thousand pounds. In order to vote upon this
qualification, too, it was declared necessary, that he should
have possessed it, if acquired by his own purchase, and not by
inheritance, for at least one year, instead of six months, the
term requisite before. The court of twenty-four directors had
before been chosen annually; but it was now enacted, that each
director should, for the future, be chosen for four years ; six
of them, however, to go out of office by rotation every year, and
not be capable of being re-chosen at the election of the six new
directors for the ensuing year. In consequence of these
alterations, the courts, both of the proprietors and directors,
it was expected, would be likely to act with more dignity and
steadiness than they had usually done before. But it seems
impossible, by any alterations, to render those courts, in any
respect, fit to govern, or even to share in the government of a
great empire; because the greater part of their members must
always have too little interest in the prosperity of that empire,
to give any serious attention to what may promote it. Frequently
a man of great, sometimes even a man of small fortune, is willing
to purchase a thousand pounds share in India stock, merely for
the influence which he expects to aquire by a vote in the court
of proprietors. It gives him a share, though not in the plunder,
yet in the appointment of the plunderers of India; the court of
directors, though they make that appointment, being necessarily
more or less under the influence of the proprietors, who not only
elect those directors, but sometimes over-rule the appointments
of their servants in India.     Provided he can enjoy this
influence for a few years, and thereby provide for a certain
number of his friends, he frequently cares little about the
dividend, or even about the value of the stock upon which his
vote is founded.      About the prosperity of the great empire,
in the government of which that vote gives him a share, he seldom
cares at all. No other sovereigns ever were, or, from the nature
of things, ever could be, so perfectly indifferent about the
happiness or misery of their subjects, the improvement or waste
of their dominions, the glory or disgrace of their
administration, as, from irresistible moral causes, the greater
part of the proprietors of such a mercantile company are, and
necessarily must be. This indifference, too, was more likely to
be increased than diminished by some of the new regulations which
were made in consequence of the parliamentary inquiry. By a
resolution of the house of commons, for example, it was declared,
that when the 1,400,000 lent to the company by government,
should be paid, and their bond-debts be reduced to 1,500,000,
they might then, and not till then, divide eight per cent. upon
their capital; and that whatever remained of their revenues and
neat profits at home should be divided into four parts; three of
them to be paid into the exchequer for the use of the public, and
the fourth to be reserved as a fund, either for the further
reduction of their bond-debts, or for the discharge of other
contingent exigencies which the company might labour under. But
if the company were bad stewards and bad sovereigns, when the
whole of their neat revenue and profits belonged to themselves,
and were at their own disposal, they were surely not likely to be
better when three-fourths of them were to belong to other people,
and the other fourth, though to be laid out for the benefit of
the company, yet to be so under the inspection and with the
approbation of other people.

It might be more agreeable to the company, that their own
servants and dependants should have either the pleasure of
wasting, or the profit of embezzling, whatever surplus might
remain, after paying the proposed dividend of eight per cent.
than that it should come into the hands of a set of people with
whom those resolutions could scarce fail to set them in some
measure at variance. The interest of those servants and
dependants might so far predominate in the court of proprietors,
as sometimes to dispose it to support the authors of depredations
which had been committed in direct violation of its own
authority. With the majority of proprietors, the support even of
the authority of their own court might sometimes be a matter of
less consequence than the support of those who had set that
authority at defiance.

The regulations of 1773, accordingly, did not put an end to the
disorder of the company's government in India. Notwithstanding
that, during a momentary fit of good conduct, they had at one
time collected into the treasury of Calcutta more than 3,000,000
sterling ; notwithstanding that they had afterwards extended
either their dominion or their depredations over a vast accession
of some of the richest and most fertile countries in India, all
was wasted and destroyed. They found themselves altogether
unprepared to stop or resist the incursion of Hyder Ali; and in
consequence of those disorders, the company is now (1784) in
greater distress than ever ; and, in order to prevent immediate
bankruptcy, is once more reduced to supplicate the assistance of
government.      Different plans have been proposed by the
different parties in parliament for the better management of its
affairs; and all those plans seem to agree in supposing, what was
indeed always abundantly evident, that it is altogether unfit to
govern its territorial possessions. Even the company itself seems
to be convinced of its own incapacity so far, and seems, upon
that account willing to give them up to government.

With the right of possessing forts and garrisons in distant and
barbarous countries is necessarily connected the right of making
peace and war in those countries.      The joint-stock companies,
which have had the one right, have constantly exercised the
other, and have frequently had it expressly conferred upon them.
How unjustly, how capriciously, how cruelly, they have commonly
exercised it, is too well known from recent experience.

When a company of merchants undertake, at their own risk and
expense, to establish a new trade with some remote and barbarous
nation, it may not be unreasonable to incorporate them into a
joint-stock company, and to grant them, in case of their success,
a monopoly of the trade for a certain number of years.     It is
the easiest and most natural way in which the state can
recompense them for hazarding a dangerous and expensive
experiment, of which the public is afterwards to reap the
benefit. A temporary monopoly of this kind may be vindicated,
upon the same principles upon which a like monopoly of a new
machine is granted to its inventor, and that of a new book to its
author. But upon the expiration of the term, the monopoly ought
certainly to determine; the forts and garrisons, if it was found
necessary to establish any, to be taken into the hands of
government, their value to be paid to the company, and the trade
to be laid open to all the subjects of the state.     By a
perpetual monopoly, all the other subjects of the state are taxed
very absurdly in two different ways : first, by the high price of
goods, which, in the case of a free trade, they could buy much
cheaper ; and, secondly, by their total exclusion from a branch
of business which it might be both convenient and profitable for
many of them to carry on.     It is for the most worthless of all
purposes, too, that they are taxed in this manner. It is merely
to enable the company to support the negligence, profusion, and
malversation of their own servants, whose disorderly conduct
seldom allows the dividend of the company to exceed the ordinary
rate of profit in trades which are altogether free, and very
frequently makes a fall even a good deal short of that rate.
Without a monopoly, however, a joint-stock company, it would
appear from experience, cannot long carry on any branch of
foreign trade. To buy in one market, in order to sell with profit
in another, when there are many competitors in both; to watch
over, not only the occasional variations in the demand, but the
much greater and more frequent variations in the competition, or
in the supply which that demand is likely to get from other
people; and to suit with dexterity and judgment both the quantity
and quality of each assortment of goods to all these
circumstances, is a species of warfare, of which the operations
are continually changing, and which can scarce ever be conducted
successfully, without such an unremitting exertion of vigilance
and attention as cannot long be expected from the directors of a
joint-stock company. The East India company, upon the redemption
of their funds, and the expiration of their exclusive privilege,
have a right, by act of parliament, to continue a corporation
with a joint stock, and to trade in their corporate capacity to
the East Indies, in common with the rest of their fellow
subjects.     But in this situation, the superior vigilance and
attention of a private adventurer would, in all probability, soon
make them weary of the trade.

An eminent French author, of great knowledge in matters of
political economy, the Abbe Morellet, gives a list of fifty-five
joint-stock companies for foreign trade, which have been
established in different parts of Europe since the year 1600, and
which, according to him, have all failed from mismanagement,
notwithstanding they had exclusive privileges. He has been
misinformed with regard to the history of two or three of them,
which were not joint-stock companies and have not failed. But, in
compensation, there have been several joint-stock companies which
have failed, and which he has omitted.

The only trades which it seems possible for a joint-stock company
to carry on successfully, without an exclusive privilege, are
those, of which all the operations are capable of being reduced
to what is called a routine, or to such a uniformity of method as
admits of little or no variation.     Of this kind is, first, the
banking trade ; secondly, the trade of insurance from fire and
from sea risk, and capture in time of war ; thirdly, the trade of
making and maintaining a navigable cut or canal; and, fourthly,
the similar trade of bringing water for the supply of a great
city.

Though the principles of the banking trade may appear somewhat
abstruse, the practice is capable of being reduced to strict
rules. To depart upon any occasion from those rules, in
consequence of some flattering speculation of extraordinary gain,
is almost always extremely dangerous and frequently fatal to the
banking company which attempts it. But the constitution of
joint-stock companies renders them in general, more tenacious of
established rules than any private copartnery. Such companies,
therefore, seem extremely well fitted for this trade. The
principal banking companies in Europe, accordingly, are
joint-stock companies, many of which manage their trade very
successfully without any exclusive privilege. The bank of England
has no other exclusive privilege, except that no other banking
company in England shall consist of more than six persons.
The two banks of Edinburgh are joint-stock companies, without any
exclusive privilege.

The value of the risk, either from fire, or from loss by sea, or
by capture, though it cannot, perhaps, be calculated very
exactly, admits, however, of such a gross estimation, as renders
it, in some degree, reducible to strict rule and method.     The
trade of insurance, therefore, may be carried on successfully by
a joint-stock company, without any exclusive privilege. Neither
the London Assurance, nor the Royal Exchange Assurance companies
have any such privilege.

When a navigable cut or canal has been once made, the management
of it becomes quite simple and easy, and it is reducible to
strict rule and method. Even the making of it is so, as it may be
contracted for with undertakers, at so much a mile, and so much a
lock. The same thing may be said of a canal, an aqueduct, or a
great pipe for bringing water to supply a great city. Such
under-takings, therefore, may be, and accordingly frequently are,
very successfully managed by joint-stock companies, without any
exclusive privilege.

To establish a joint-stock company, however, for any undertaking,
merely because such a company might be capable of managing it
successfully ; or, to exempt a particular set of dealers from
some of the general laws which take place with regard to all
their neighbours, merely because they might be capable of
thriving, if they had such an exemption, would certainly not be
reasonable. To render such an establishment perfectly reasonable,
with the circumstance of being reducible to strict rule and
method, two other circumstances ought to concur.      First, it
ought to appear with the clearest evidence, that the undertaking
is of greater and more general utility than the greater part of
common trades ; and, secondly, that it requires a greater capital
than can easily be collected into a private copartnery.     If a
moderate capital were sufficient, the great utility of the
undertaking would not be a sufficient reason for establishing a
joint-stock company; because, in this case, the demand for what
it was to produce, would readily and easily be supplied by
private adventurers. In the four trades above mentioned, both
those circumstances concur.

The great and general utility of the banking trade, when
prudently managed, has been fully explained in the second book of
this Inquiry.      But a public bank, which is to support public
credit, and, upon particular emergencies, to advance to
government the whole produce of a tax, to the amount, perhaps, of
several millions, a year or two before it comes in, requires a
greater capital than can easily be collected into any private
copartnery.

The trade of insurance gives great security to the fortunes of
private people, and, by dividing among a great many that loss
which would ruin an individual, makes it fall light and easy upon
the whole society. In order to give this security, however, it is
necessary that the insurers should have a very large capital.
Before the establishment of the two joint-stock companies for
insurance in London, a list, it is said, was laid before the
attorney-general, of one hundred and fifty private iusurers, who
had failed in the course of a few years.

That navigable cuts and canals, and the works which are sometimes
necessary for supplying a great city with water, are of great and
general utility, while, at the same time, they frequently require
a greater expense than suits the fortunes of private people, is
sufficiently obvious.

Except the four trades above mentioned, I have not been able to
recollect any other, in which all the three circumstances
requisite for rendering reasonable the establislment of a
joint-stock company concur.     The English copper company of
London, the lead-smelting company, the glass-grinding company,
have not even the pretext of any great or singular utility in the
object which they pursue ; nor does the pursuit of that object
seem to require any expense unsuitable to the fortunes of many
private men. Whether the trade which those companies carry on, is
reducible to such strict rule and method as to render it fit for
the management of a joint-stock company, or whether they have any
reason to boast of their extraordinary profits, I do not pretend
to know. The mine-adventurers company has been long ago bankrupt.
A share in the stock of the British Linen company of Edinburgh
sells, at present, very much below par, though less so than it
did some years ago. The joint-stock companies, which are
established for the public-spirited purpose of promoting some
particular manufacture, over and above managing their own affairs
ill, to the diminution of the general stock of the society, can,
in other respects, scarce ever fail to do more harm than good.
Notwithstanding the most upright intentions, the unavoidable
partiality of their directors to particular branches of the
manufacture, of which the undertakers mislead and impose upon
them, is a real discouragement to the rest, and necessarily
breaks, more or less, that natural proportion which would
otherwise establish itself between judicious industry and profit,
and which, to the general industry of the country, is of all
encouragements the greatest and the most effectual.

ART. II.  Of the Expense of the Institution for the Education of
Youth.

The institutions for the education of the youth may, in the same
manner, furnish a revenue sufficient for defraying their own
expense.     The fee or honorary, which the scholar pays to the
master, naturally constitutes a revenue of this kind.

Even where the reward of the master does not arise altogether
from this natural revenue, it still is not necessary that it
should be derived from that general revenue of the society, of
which the collection and application are, in most countries,
assigned to the executive power. Through the greater part of
Europe, accordingly, the endowment of schools and colleges makes
either no charge upon that general revenue, or but a very small
one. It everywhere arises chiefly from some local or provincial
revenue, from the rent of some landed estate, or from the
interest of some sum of money, allotted and put under the
management of trustees for this particular purpose, sometimes by
the sovereign himself, and sometimes by some private donor.

Have those public endowments contributed in general, to promote
the end of their institution ? Have they contributed to encourage
the diligence, and to improve the abilities, of the teachers?
Have they directed the course of education towards objects more
useful, both to the individual and to the public, than those to
which it would naturally have gone of its own accord ? It should
not seem very difficult to give at least a probable answer to
each of those questions.

In every profession, the exertion of the greater part of those
who exercise it, is always in proportion to the necessity they
are under of making that exertion. This necessity is greatest
with those to whom the emoluments of their profession are the
only source from which they expect their fortune, or even their
ordinary revenue and subsistence. In order to acquire this
fortune, or even to get this subsistence, they must, in the
course of a year, execute a certain quantity of work of a known
value; and, where the competition is free, the rivalship of
competitors, who are all endeavouring to justle one another out
of employment, obliges every man to endeavour to execute his work
with a certain degree of exactness. The greatness of the objects
which are to be acquired by success in some particular
professions may, no doubt, sometimes animate the exertions of a
few men of extraordinary spirit and ambition. Great objects,
however, are evidently not necessary, in order to occasion the
greatest exertions. Rivalship and emulation render excellency,
even in mean professions, an object of ambition, and frequently
occasion the very greatest exertions.     Great objects, on the
contrary, alone and unsupported by the necessity of application,
have seldom been sufficient to occasion any considerable
exertion. In England, success in the profession of the law leads
to some very great objects of ambition ; and yet how few men,
born to easy fortunes, have ever in this country been eminent in
that profession?

The endowments of schools and colleges have necessarily
diminished, more or less, the necessity of application in the
teachers. Their subsistence, so far as it arises from their
salaries, is evidently derived from a fund, altogether
independent of their success and reputation in their particular
professions.

In some universities, the salary makes but a part, and frequently
but a small part, of the emoluments of the teacher, of which the
greater part arises from the honoraries or fees of his pupils.
The necessity of application, though always more or less
diminished, is not, in this case, entirely taken away. Reputation
in his profession is still of some importance to him, and he
still has some dependency upon the affection, gratitude, and
favourable report of those who have attended upon his
instructions; and these favourable sentiments he is likely to
gain in no way so well as by deserving them, that is, by the
abilities and diligence with which he discharges every part of
his duty.

In other universities, the teacher is prohibited from receiving
any honorary or fee from his pupils, and his salary constitutes
the whole of the revenue which he derives from his office.
His interest is, in this case, set as directly in opposition to
his duty as it is possible to set it.     It is the interest of
every man to live as much at his ease as he can; and if his
emoluments are to be precisely the same, whether he does or does
not perform some very laborious duty, it is certainly his
interest, at least as interest is vulgarly understood, either to
neglect it altogether, or, if he is subject to some authority
which will not suffer him to do this, to perform it in as
careless and slovenly a manner as that authority will permit.
If he is naturally active and a lover of labour, it is his
interest to employ that activity in any way from which he can
derive some advantage, rather than in the performarnce of his
duty, from which he can derive none.

If the authority to which he is subject resides in the body
corporate, the college, or university, of which he himself is a
member, and in which the greater part of the other members are,
like himself, persons who either are, or ought to be teachers,
they are likely to make a common cause, to be all very indulgent
to one another, and every man to consent that his neighbour may
neglect his duty, provided he himself is allowed to neglect his
own. In the university of Oxford, the greater part of the public
professors have, for these many years, given up altogether even
the pretence of teaching.

If the authority to which he is subject resides, not so much in
the body corporate, of which he is a member, as in some other
extraneous persons, in the bishop of the diocese, for example, in
the governor of the province, or, perhaps, in some minister of
state, it is not, indeed, in this case, very likely that he will
be suffered to neglect his duty altogether.     All that such
superiors, however, can force him to do, is to attend upon his
pupils a certain number of hours, that is, to give a certain
number of lectures in the week, or in the year.     What those
lectures shall be, must still depend upon the diligence of the
teacher ; and that diligence is likely to be proportioned to the
motives which he has for exerting it. An extraneous jurisdiction
of this kind, besides, is liable to be exercised both ignorantly
and capriciously. In its nature, it is arbitrary and
discretionary; and the persons who exercise it, neither attending
upon the lectures of the teacher themselves, nor perhaps
understanding the sciences which it is his business to teach, are
seldom capable of exercising it with judgment. From the insolence
of office, too, they are frequently indifferent how they exercise
it, and are very apt to censure or deprive him of his office
wantonly and without any just cause. The person subject to such
jurisdiction is necessarily degraded by it, and, instead of being
one of the most respectable, is rendered one of the meanest and
most contemptible persons in the society. It is by powerful
protection only, that he can effectually guard himself against
the bad usage to which he is at all times exposed; and this
protection he is most likely to gain, not by ability or diligence
in his profession, but by obsequiousness to the will of his
superiors, and by being ready, at all times, to sacrifice to that
will the rights, the interest, and the honour of the body
corporate, of which he is a member. Whoever has attended for any
considerable time to the administration of a French university,
must have had occasion to remark the effects which naturally
result from an arbitrary and extraneous jurisdiction of this
kind.

Whatever forces a certain number of students to any college or
university, independent of the merit or reputation of the
teachers, tends more or less to diminish the necessity of that
merit or reputation.

The privileges of graduates in arts, in law, physic, and
divinity, when they can be obtained only by residing a certain
number of years in certain universities, necessarily force a
certain number of students to such universities, independent of
the merit or reputation of the teachers. The privileges of
graduates are a sort of statutes of apprenticeship, which have
contributed to the improvement of education just as the other
statutes of apprenticeship have to that of arts and manufactures.

The charitable foundations of scholarships, exhibitions,
bursaries, etc. necessarily attach a certain number of students
to certain colleges, independent altogether of the merit of those
particular colleges. Were the students upon such charitable
foundations left free to choose what college they liked best,
such liberty might perhaps contribute to excite some emulation
among different colleges. A regulation, on the contrary, which
prohibited even the independent members of every particular
college from leaving it, and going to any other, without leave
first asked and obtained of that which they meant to abandon,
would tend very much to extinguish that emulation.

If in each college, the tutor or teacher, who was to instruct
each student in all arts and sciences, should not be voluntarily
chosen by the student, but appointed by the head of the college ;
and if, in case of neglect, inability, or bad usage, the student
should not be allowed to change him for another, without leave
first asked and obtained ; such a regulation would not only tend
very much to extinguish all emulation among the different tutors
of the same college, but to diminish very much, in all of them,
the necessity of diligence and of attention to their respective
pupils.     Such teachers, though very well paid by their
students, might be as much disposed to neglect them, as those who
are not paid by them at all or who have no other recompense but
their salary.

If the teacher happens to be a man of sense, it must be an
unpleasant thing to him to be conscious, while he is lecturing to
his students, that he is either speaking or reading nonsense, or
what is very little better than nonsense. It must, too, be
unpleasant to him to observe, that the greater part of his
students desert his lectures ; or perhaps, attend upon them with
plain enough marks of neglect, contempt, and derision. If he is
obliged, therefore, to give a certain number of lectures, these
motives alone, without any other interest, might dispose him to
take some pains to give tolerably good ones. Several different
expedients, however, may be fallen upon, which will effectually
blunt the edge of all those incitements to diligence. The
teacher, instead of explaining to his pupils himself the science
in which he proposes to instruct them, may read some book upon
it; and if this book is written in a foreign and dead language,
by interpreting it to them into their own, or, what would give
him still less trouble, by making them interpret it to him, and
by now and then making an occasional remark upon it, he may
flatter himself that he is giving a lecture.     The slightest
degree of knowledge and application will enable him to do this,
without exposing himself to contempt or derision, by saying any
thing that is really foolish, absurd, or ridiculous. The
discipline of the college, at the same time, may enable him to
force all his pupils to the most regular attendance upon his sham
lecture, and to maintain the most decent and respectful behaviour
during the whole time of the performance.

The discipline of colleges and universities is in general
contrived, not for the benefit of the students, but for the
interest, or, more properly speaking, for the ease of the
masters. Its object is, in all cases, to maintain the authority
of the master, and, whether he neglects or performs his duty, to
oblige the students in all cases to behave to him as if he
performed it with the greatest diligence and ability. It seems to
presume perfect wisdom and virtue in the one order, and the
greatest weakness and folly in the other. Where the masters,
however, really perform their duty, there are no examples, I
believe, that the greater part of the students ever neglect
theirs.     No discipline is ever requisite to force attendance
upon lectures which are really worth the attending, as is well
known wherever any such lectures are given. Force and restraint
may, no doubt, be in some degree requisite, in order to oblige
children, or very young boys, to attend to those parts of
education, which it is thought necessary for them to acquire
during that early period of life ; but after twelve or thirteen
years of age, provided the master does his duty, force or
restraint can scarce ever be necessary to carry on any part of
education. Such is the generosity of the greater part of young
men, that so far from being disposed to neglect or despise the
instructions of their master, provided he shews some serious
intention of being of use to them, they are generally inclined to
pardon a great deal of incorrectness in the performance of his
duty, and sometimes even to conceal from the public a good deal
of gross negligence.

Those parts of education, it is to be observed, for the teaching
of which there are no public institutions, are generally the best
taught. When a young man goes to a fencing or a dancing school,
he does not, indeed, always learn to fence or to dance very well;
but he seldom fails of learning to fence or to dance. The good
effects of the riding school are not commonly so evident. The
expense of a riding school is so great, that in most places it is
a public institution. The three most essential parts of literary
education, to read, write, and account, it still continues to be
more common to acquire in private than in public schools; and it
very seldom happens, that anybody fails of acquiring them to the
degree in which it is necessary to acquire them.

In England, the public schools are much less corrupted than the
universities. In the schools, the youth are taught, or at least
may be taught, Greek and Latin; that is, everything which the
masters pretend to teach, or which it is expected they should
teach. In the universities, the youth neither are taught, nor
always can find any proper means of being taught the sciences,
which it is the business of those incorporated bodies to teach.
The reward of the schoolmaster, in most cases, depends
principally, in some cases almost entirely, upon the fees or
honoraries of his scholars. Schools have no exclusive privileges.
In order to obtain the honours of graduation, it is not necessary
that a person should bring a certificate of his having studied a
certain number of years at a public school. If, upon examination,
he appears to understand what is taught there, no questions are
asked about the place where he learnt it.

The parts of education which are commonly taught in universities,
it may perhaps be said, are not very well taught. But had it not
been for those institutions, they would not have been commonly
taught at all; and both the individual and the public would have
suffered a good deal from the want of those important parts of
education.

The present universities of Europe were originally, the greater
part of them, ecclesiastical corporations, instituted for the
education of churchmen. They were founded by the authority of the
pope; and were so entirely under his immediate protection, that
their members, whether masters or students, had all of them what
was then called the benefit of clergy, that is, were exempted
from the civil jurisdiction of the countries in which their
respective universities were situated, and were amenable only to
the ecclesiastical tribunals. What was taught in the greater part
of those universities was suitable to the end of their
institution, either theology, or something that was merely
preparatory to theology.

When Christianity was first established by law, a corrupted Latin
had become the common language of all the western parts of
Europe. The service of the church, accordingly, and the
translation of the Bible which were read in churches, were both
in that corrupted Latin; that is, in the common language of the
country, After the irruption of the barbarous nations who
overturned the Roman empire, Latin gradually ceased to be the
language of any part of Europe. But the reverence of the people
naturally preserves the established forms and ceremonies of
religion long after the circumstances which first introduced and
rendered them reasonable, are no more. Though Latin, therefore,
was no longer understood anywhere by the great body of the
people, the whole service of the church still continued to be
performed in that language.      Two different languages were
thus established in Europe, in the same manner as in ancient
Egypt: a language of the priests, and a language of the people; a
sacred and a profane, a learned and an unlearned language. But it
was necessary that the priests should understand something of
that sacred and learned language in which they were to officiate;
and the study of the Latin language therefore made, from the
beginning, an essential part of university education.

It was not so with that either of the Greek or of the Hebrew
language. The infallible decrees of the church had pronounced the
Latin translation of the Bible, commonly called the Latin
Vulgate, to have been equally dictated by divine inspiration, and
therefore of equal authority with the Greek and Hebrew originals.
The knowledge of those two languages, therefore, not being
indispensably requsite to a churchman, the study of them did not
for along time make a necessary part of the common course of
university education.     There are some Spanish universities, I
am assured, in which the study of the Greek language has never
yet made any part of that course. The first reformers found the
Greek text of the New Testament, and even the Hebrew text of the
Old, more favourable to their opinions than the vulgate
translation, which, as might naturally be supposed, had been
gradually accommodated to support the doctrines of the Catholic
Church. They set themselves, therefore, to expose the many errors
of that translation, which the Roman catholic clergy were thus
put under the necessity of defending or explaining. But this
could not well be done without some knowledge of the original
languages, of which the study was therefore gradually introduced
into the greater part of universities; both of those which
embraced, and of those which rejected, the doctrines of the
reformation. The Greek language was connected with every part of
that classical learning, which, though at first principally
cultivated by catholics and Italians, happened to come into
fashion much about the same time that the doctrines of the
reformation were set on foot. In the greater part of
universities, therefore, that language was taught previous to the
study of philosophy, and as soon as the student had made some
progress in the Latin. The Hebrew language having no connection
with classical learning, and, except the Holy Scriptures, being
the language of not a single book in any esteem the study of it
did not commonly commence till after that of philosophy, and when
the student had entered upon the study of theology.

Originally, the first rudiments, both of the Greek and Latin
languages, were taught in universities; and in some universities
they still continue to be so. In others, it is expected that the
student should have previously acquired, at least, the rudiments
of one or both of those languages, of which the study continues
to make everywhere a very considerable part of university
education.

The ancient Greek philosophy was divided into three great
branches; physics, or natural philosophy; ethics, or moral
philosophy; and logic. This general division seems perfectly
agreeable to the nature of things.

The great phenomena of nature, the revolutions of the heavenly
bodies, eclipses, comets; thunder and lightning, and other
extraordinary meteors; the generation, the life, growth, and
dissolution of plants and animals; are objects which, as they
necessarily excite the wonder, so they naturally call forth the
curiosity of mankind to inquire into their causes.
Superstition first attempted to satisfy this curiosity, by
referring all those wonderful appearances to the immediate a
gency of the gods. Philosophy afterwards endeavoured to account
for them from more familiar causes, or from such as mankind were
better acquainted with, than the agency of the gods. As those
great phenomena are the first objects of human curiosity, so the
science which pretends to explain them must naturally have been
the first branch of philosophy that was cuitivated. The first
philosophers, accordingly, of whom history has preserved any
account, appear to have been natural philosophers.

In every age and country of the world, men must have attended to
the characters, designs, and actions of one another; and many
reputable rules and maxims for the conduct of human life must
have been laid down and approved of by common consent. As soon as
writing came into fashion, wise men, or those who fancied
themselves such, would naturally endeavour to increase the number
of those established and respected maxims, and to express their
own sense of what was either proper or improper conduct,
sometimes in the more artificial form of apologues, like what are
called the fables of Aesop; and sometimes in the more simple one
of apophthegms or wise sayings, like the proverbs of Solmnon, the
verses of Theognis and Phocyllides, and some part of the works of
Hesiod.     They might continue in this manner, for a long time,
merely to multiply the number of those maxims of prudence and
morality, without even attempting to arrange them in any very
distinct or methodical order, much less to connect them together
by one or more general principles, from which they were all
deducible, like effects from their natural causes. The beauty of
a systematical arrangement of different observations, connected
by a few common principles, was first seen in the rude essays of
those ancient times towards a system of natural philosophy.
Something of the same kind was afterwards attempted in morals.
The maxims of common life were arranged in some methodical order,
and connected together by a few common principles, in the same
manner as they had attempted to arrange and connect the phenomena
of nature.      The science which pretends to investigate and
explain those connecting principles, is what is properly called
Moral Philosophy.

Different authors gave different systems, both of natural and
moral philosophy. But the arguments by which they supported those
different systems, far from being always demonstrations, were
frequently at best but very slender probabilities, and sometimes
mere sophisms, which had no other foundation but the inaccuracy
and ambiguity of common language.      Speculative systems, have,
in all ages of the world, been adopted for reasons too frivolous
to have determined the judgment of any man of common sense, in a
matter of the smallest pecuniary interest. Gross sophistry has
scarce ever had any influence upon the opinions of mankind,
except in matters of philosophy and speculation ; and in these it
has frequently had the greatest. The patrons of each system of
natural and moral philosophy, naturally endeavoured to expose the
weakness of the arguments adduced to support the systems which
were opposite to their own. In examining those arguments, they
were necessarily led to consider the difference between a
probable and a demonstrative argument, between a fallacious and a
conclusive one; and logic, or the science of the general
principles of good and bad reasoning, necessarily arose out of
the observations which a scrutiny of this kind gave occasion to ;
though, in its origin, posterior both to physics and to ethics,
it was commonly taught, not indeed in all, but in the greater
part of the ancient schools of philosophy, previously to either
of those sciences. The student, it seems to have been thought,
ought to understand well the difference between good and bad
reasoning, before he was led to reason upon subjects of so great
importance.

This ancient division of philosophy into three parts was, in the
greater part of the universities of Europe, changed for another
into five.

In the ancient philosophy, whatever was taught concerning the
nature either of the human mind or of the Deity, made a part of
the system of physics.      Those beings, in whatever their
essence might be supposed to consist, were parts of the great
system of the universe, and parts, too, productive of the most
important effects.     Whatever human reason could either
conclude or conjecture concerning them, made, as it were, two
chapters, though no doubt two very important ones, of the science
which pretended to give an account of the origin and revolutions
of the great system of the universe. But in the universities of
Europe, where philosophy was taught only as subservient to
theology, it was natural to dwell longer upon these two chapters
than upon any other of the science. They were gradually more and
more extended, and were divided into many inferior chapters; till
at last the doctrine of spirits, of which so little can be known,
came to take up as much room in the system of philosophy as the
doctrine of bodies, of which so much can be known. The doctrines
concerning those two subjects were considered as making two
distinct sciences.      What are called metaphysics, or
pnemnatics, were set in opposition to physics, and were
cultivated not only as the more sublime, but, for the purposes of
a particular profession, as the more useful science of the two.
The proper subject of experiment and observation, a subject in
which a careful attention is capable of making so many useful
discoveries, was almost entirely neglected.      The subject in
which, after a very few simple and almost obvious truths, the
most careful attention can discover nothing but obscurity and
uncertainty, and can consequently produce nothing but subtlelies
and sophisms, was greatly cultivated.

When those two sciences had thus been set in opposition to one
another, the comparison between them naturally gave birth to a
third, to what was called ontology, or the science which treated
of the qualities and attributes which were common to both the
subjects of the other two sciences. But if subtleties and
sophisms composed the greater part of the metaphysics or
pneumatics of the schools, they composed the whole of this cobweb
science of ontology, which was likewise sometimes called
metaphysics.

Wherein consisted the happiness and perfection of a man,
considered not only as an individual, but as the member of a
family, of a state, and of the great society of mankind, was the
object which the ancient moral philosophy proposed to
investigate. In that philosophy, the duties of human life were
treated of as subservient to the happiness and perfection of
human life, But when moral, as well as natural philosophy, came
to be taught only as subservient to theology, the duties of human
life were treated of as chiefly subservient to the happiness of a
life to come. In the ancient philosophy, the perfection of virtue
was represented as necessarily productive, to the person who
possessed it, of the most perfect happiness in this life. In the
modern philosophy, it was frequently represented as generally, or
rather as almost always, inconsistent with any degree of
happiness in this life; and heaven was to be earned only by
penance and mortification, by the austerities and abasement of a
monk, not by the liberal, generous, and spirited conduct of a
man. Casuistry, and an ascetic morality, made up, in most cases,
the greater part of the moral philosophy of the schools. By far
the most important of all the different branches of philosophy
became in this manner by far the most corrupted.

Such, therefore, was the common course of philosophical education
in the greater part of the universities in Europe. Logic was
taught first; ontology came in the second place; pneumatology,
comprehending the doctrine concerning the nature of the human
soul and of the Deity, in the third; in the fourth followed a
debased system of moral philosophy, which was considered as
immediately connected with the doctrines of pneumatology, with
the immortality of the human soul, and with the rewards and
punishments which, from the justice of the Deity, were to be
expected in a life to come: a short and superficial system of
physics usually concluded the course.

The alterations which the universities of Europe thus introduced
into the ancient course of philosophy were all meant for the
education of ecclesiastics, and to render it a more proper
introduction to the study of theology But the additional quantity
of subtlety and sophistry, the casuistry and ascetic morality
which those alterations introduced into it, certainly did not
render it more for the education of gentlemen or men of the
world, or more likely either to improve the understanding or to
mend the heart.

This course of philosophy is what still continues to be taught in
the greater part of the universities of Europe, with more or less
diligence, according as the constitution of each particular
university happens to render diligence more or less necessary to
the teachers. In some of the richest and best endowed
universities, the tutors content themselves with teaching a few
unconnected shreds and parcels of this corrupted course ; and
even these they commonly teach very negligently and
superficially.

The improvements which, in modern times have been made in several
different branches of philosophy, have not, the greater part of
them, been made in universities, though some, no doubt, have. The
greater part of universities have not even been very forward to
adopt those improvements after they were made; and several of
those learned societies have chosen to remain, for a long time,
the sanctuaries in which exploded systems and obsolete prejudices
found shelter and protection, after they had been hunted out of
every other corner of the world. In general, the richest and best
endowed universities have been slowest in adopting those
improvements, and the most averse to permit any considerable
change in the established plan of education. Those improvements
were more easily introduced into some of the poorer universities,
in which the teachers, depending upon their reputation for the
greater part of their subsistence, were obliged to pay more
attention to the current opinions of the world.

But though the public schools and universities of Europe were
originally intended only for the education of a particular
profession, that of churchmen ; and though they were not always
very diligent in instructing their pupils, even in the sciences
which were supposed neccessary for that profession; yet they
gradually drew to themselves the education of almost all other
people, particularly of almost all gentlemen and men of fortune.
No better method, it seems, could be fallen upon, of spending,
with any advantage, the long interval between infancy and that
period of life at which men begin to apply in good earnest to the
real business of the world, the business which is to employ them
during the remainder of their days. The greater part of what is
taught in schools and universities, however, does not seem to be
the most proper preparation for that business.

In England, it becomes every day more and more the custom to send
young people to travel in foreign countries immediately upon
their leaving school, and without sending them to any university.
Our young people, it is said, generally return home much improved
by their travels. A young man, who goes abroad at seventeen or
eighteen, and returns home at one-and-twenty, returns three or
four years older than he was when he went abroad ; and at that
age it is very difficult not to improve a good deal in three or
four years. In the course of his travels, he generally acquires
some knowledge of one or two foreign languages; a knowledge,
however, which is seldom sufficient to enable him either to speak
or write them with propriety. In other respects, he commonly
returns home more conceited, more unprincipled, more dissipated,
and more incapable of my serious application, either to study or
to business, than he could well have become in so short a time
had he lived at home. By travelling so very young, by spending in
the most frivolous dissipation the most previous years of his
life, at a distance from the inspection and controul of his
parents and relations, every useful habit, which the earlier
parts of his education might have had some tendency to form in
him, instead of being riveted and confirmed, is almost
necessarily either weakened or effaced. Nothing but the discredit
into which the universities are allowing themselves to fall,
could ever have brought into repute so very absurd a practice as
that of travelling at this early period of life. By sending his
son abroad, a father delivers himself, at least for some time,
from so disagreeable an object as that of a son unemployed,
neglected, and going to ruin before his eyes.

Such have been the effects of some of the modern institutions for
education.

Different plans and different institutions for education seem to
have taken place in other ages and nations.

In the republics of ancient Greece, every free citizen was
instructed, under the direction of the public magistrate, in
gymnastic exercises and in music. By gynmastic exercises, it was
intended to harden his body, to sharpen his courage, and to
prepare him for the fatigues and dangers of war ; and as the
Greek militia was, by all accounts, one of the best that ever was
in the world, this part of their public education must have
answered completely the purpose for which it was intended. By the
other part, music, it was proposed, at least by the philosophers
and historians, who have given us an account of those
institutions, to humanize the mind, to soften the temper, and to
dispose it for performing all the social and moral duties of
public and private life.

In ancient Rome, the exercises of the Campus Martius answered the
same purpose as those of the Gymnasium in ancient Greece, and
they seem to have answered it equally well. But among the Romans
there was nothing which corresponded to the musical education of
the Greeks. The morals of the Romans, however, both in private
and public life, seem to have been, not only equal, but, upon the
whole, a good deal superior to those of the Greeks. That they
were superior in private life, we have the express testimony of
Polybius, and of Dionysius of Halicarnassus, two authors well
acquainted with both nations; and the whole tenor of the Greek
and Roman history bears witness to the superiority of the public
morals of the Romans. The good temper and moderation of
contending factions seem to be the most essential circumstances
in the public morals of a free people. But the factions of the
Greeks were almost always violent and sanguinary ; whereas, till
the time of the Gracchi, no blood had ever been shed in any Roman
faction; and from the time of the Gracchi, the Roman republic may
be considered as in reality dissolved. Notwithstanding,
therefore, the very respectable authority of Plato, Aristotle,
and Polybius, and notwithstanding the very ingenious reasons by
which Mr. Montesquieu endeavours to support that authority, it
seems probable that the musical education of the Greeks had no
great effect in mending their morals, since, without any such
education, those of the Romans were, upon the whole, superior.
The respect of those ancient sages for the institutions of their
ancestors had probably disposed them to find much political
wisdom in what was, perhaps, merely an ancient custom, continued,
without interruption, from the earliest period of those
societies, to the times in which they had arrived at a
considerable degree of refinement. Music and dancing are the
great amusements of almost all barbarous nations, and the great
accomplishments which are supposed to fit any man for
entertaining his society. It is so at this day among the negroes
on the coast of Africa. It was so among the ancient Celtes, among
the ancient Scandinavians, and, as we may learn from Homer, among
the ancient Greeks, in the times preceding the Trojan war. When
the Greek tribes had formed themselves into little republics, it
was natural that the study of those accomplishments should for a
long time make a part of the public and common education of the
people.

The masters who instructed the young people, either in music or
in military exercises, do not seem to have been paid, or even
appointed by the state, either in Rome or even at Athens, the
Greek republic of whose laws and customs we are the best
informed. The state required that every free citizen should fit
himself for defending it in war, and should upon that account,
learn his military exercises. But it left him to learn them of
such masters as he could find ; and it seems to have advanced
nothing for this purpose, but a public field or place of
exercise, in which he should practise and perform them.

In the early ages, both of the Greek and Roman republics, the
other parts of education seem to have consisted in learning to
read, write, and account, according to the arithmetic of the
times. These accomplishments the richer citizens seem frequently
to have acquired at home, by the assistance of some demestic
pedagogue, who was, generally, either a slave or a freedman ; and
the poorer citizens in the schools of such masters as made a
trade of teaching for hire. Such parts of education, however,
were abandoned altogether to the care of the parents or guardians
of each individual. It does not appear that the state ever
assumed any inspection or direction of them. By a law of Solon,
indeed, the children were acquitted from maintaining those
parents who had neglected to instruct them in some profitable
trade or business.

In the progress of refinement, when philosophy and rhetoric came
into fashion, the better sort of people used to send their
children to the schools of philosophers and rhetoricians, in
order to be instructed in these fashionable sciences. But those
schools were not supported by the public. They were, for a long
time, barely tolerated by it. The demand for philosophy and
rhetoric was, for a long time, so small, that the first professed
teachers of either could not find constant employment in any one
city, but were obliged to travel about from place to place. In
this manner lived Zeno of Elea, Protagoras, Gorgias, Hippias, and
many others. As the demand increased, the school, both of
philosophy and rhetoric, became stationary, first in Athens, and
afterwards in several other cities. The state, however, seems
never to have encouraged them further. than by assigning to some
of them a particular place to teach in, which was sometimes done,
too, by private donors. The state seems to have assigned the
Academy to Plato, the Lyceum to Aristotle, and the Portico to
Zeno of Citta, the founder of the Stoics. But Epicurus bequeathed
his gardens to his own school. Till about the time of Marcus
Antoninus, however, no teacher appears to have had any salary
from the public, or to have had any other emoluments, but what
arose from the honorarius or fees of his scholars. The bounty
which that philosophical emperor, as we learn from Lucian,
bestowed upon one of the teachers of philosophy, probably lasted
no longer than his own life. There was nothing equivalent to the
privileges of graduation; and to have attended any of those
schools was not necessary, in order to be permitted to practise
any particular trade or profession. If the opinion of their own
utility could not draw scholars to them, the law neither forced
anybody to go to them, nor rewarded anybody for having gone to
them. The teachers had no jurisdiction over their pupils, nor any
other authority besides that natural authority which superior
virtue and abilities never fail to procure from young people
towards those who are entrusted with any part of their education.

At Rome, the study of the civil law made a part of the education,
not of the greater part of the citizens, but of some particular
families. The young people, however, who wished to acquire
knowledge in the law, had no public school to go to, and had no
other method of studying it, than by frequenting the company of
such of their relations and friends as were supposed to
understand it. It is, perhaps, worth while to remark, that though
the laws of the twelve tables were many of them copied from those
of some ancient Greek republics, yet law never seems to have
grown up to be a science in any republic of ancient Greece. In
Rome it became a science very early, and gave a considerable
degree of illustration to those citizens who had the reputation
of understanding it. In the republics of ancient Greece,
particularly in Athens, the ordinary courts of justice consisted
of numerous, and therefore disorderly, bodies of people, who
frequently decided almost at random, or as clamour, faction, and
party-spirit, happened to determine. The ignominy of an unjust
decision, when it was to be divided among five hundred, a
thousand, or fifteen hundred people (for some of their courts
were so very numerous), could not fall very heavy upon any
individual.      At Rome, on the contrary, the principal courts
of justice consisted either of a single judge, or of a small
number of judges, whose characters, especially as they
deliberated always in public, could not fail to be very much
affected by any rash or unjust decision.   In doubtful cases such
courts, from their anxiety to avoid blame, would naturally
endeavour to shelter themselves under the example or precedent of
the judges who had sat before them, either in the same or in some
other court. This attention to practice and precedent,
necessarily formed the Roman law into that regular and orderly
system in which it has been delivered down to us ; and the like
attention has had the like effects upon the laws of every other
country where such attention has taken place. The superiority of
character in the Romans over that of the Greeks, so much remarked
by Polybius and Dionysius of Halicarnassus, was probably more
owing to the better constitution of their courts of justice, than
to any of the circumstances to which those authors ascribe it.
The Romans are said to have been particularly distinguished for
their superior respect to an oath. But the people who were
accustomed to make oath only before some diligent and well
informed court of justice, would naturally be much more attentive
to what they swore, than they who were accustomed to do the same
thing before mobbish and disorderly assemblies.

The abilities, both civil and military, of the Greeks and Romans,
will readily be allowed to have been at least equal to those of
any modern nation. Our prejudice is perhaps rather to overrate
them. But except in what related to military exercises, the state
seems to have been at no pains to form those great abilities; for
I cannot be induced to believe that the musical education of the
Greeks could be of much consequence in forming them. Masters,
however, had been found, it seems, for instructing the better
sort of people among those nations, in every art and science in
which the circumstances of their society rendered it necessary or
convenient for them to be instructed. The demand for such
instruction produced, what it always produces, the talent for
giving it; and the emulation which an unrestrained competition
never fails to excite, appears to have brought that talent to a
very high degree of perfection. In the attention which the
ancient philosophers excited, in the empire which they acquired
over the opinions and principles of their auditors, in the
faculty which they possessed of giving a certain tone and
character to the conduct and conversation of those auditors, they
appear to have been much superior to any modern teachers. In
modern times, the diligence of public teachers is more or less
corrupted by the circumstances which render them more or less
independent of their success and reputation in their particular
professions.  Their salaries, too, put the private teacher, who
would pretend to come into competition with them, in the same
state with a merchant who attempts to trade without a bounty, in
competition with those who trade with a considerable one. If he
sells his goods at nearly the same price, he cannot have the same
profit ; and poverty and beggary at least, if not bankruptcy and
ruin, will infallibly be his lot.      If he attempts to sell
them much dearer, he is likely to have so few customers, that his
circumstances will not be much mended. The privileges of
graduation, besides, are in many countries necessary, or at least
extremely convenient, to most men of learned professions, that
is, to the far greater part of those who have occasion for a
learned education.   But those privileges can be obtained only by
attending the lectures of the public teachers. The most careful
attendance upon the ablest instructions of any private teacher
cannot always give any title to demand them.     It is from these
different causes that the private teacher of any of the sciences,
which are commonly taught in universities, is, in modern times,
generally considered as in the very lowest order of men of
letters. A man of real abilities can scarce find out a more
humiliating or a more unprofitable employment to turn them to.
The endowments of schools and colleges have in this manner not
only corrupted the diligence of public teachers, but have
rendered it almost impossible to have any good private ones.

Were there no public institutions for education, no system, no
science, would be taught, for which there was not some demand, or
which the circumstances of the times did not render it either
necessary or convenient, or at least fashionable to learn. A
private teacher could never find his account in teaching either
an exploded and antiquated system of a science acknowledged to be
useful, or a science universally believed to be a mere useless
and pedantic heap of sophistry and nonsense.      Such systems,
such sciences, can subsist nowhere but in those incorporated
societies for education, whose prosperity and revenue are in a
great measure independent of their industry. Were there no public
institutions for education, a gentleman, after going through,
with application and abilities, the most complete course of
education which the circumstances of the times were supposed to
afford, could not come into the world completely ignorant of
everything which is the common subject of conversation among
gentlemen and men of the world.

There are no public institutions for the education of women, and
there is accordingly nothing useless, absurd, or fantastical, in
the common course of their education. They are taught what their
parents or guardians judge it necessary or useful for them to
learn, and they are taught nothing else. Every part of their
education tends evidently to some useful purpose ; either to
improve the natural attractions of their person, or to form their
mind to reserve, to modesty, to chastity, and to economy ; to
render them both likely to became the mistresses of a family, and
to behave properly when they have become such. In every part of
her life, a woman feels some conveniency or advantage from every
part of her education.     It seldom happens that a man, in any
part of his life, derives any conveniency or advantage from some
of the most laborious and troublesome parts of his education.

Ought the public, therefore, to give no attention, it may be
asked, to the education of the people ? Or, if it ought to give
any, what are the different parts of education which it ought to
attend to in the different orders of the people? and in what
manner ought it to attend to them ?

In some cases, the state of society necessarily places the
greater part of individuals in such situations as naturally form
in them, without any attention of government, almost all the
abilities and virtues which that state requires, or perhaps can
admit of. In other cases, the state of the society does not place
the greater part of individuals in such situations; and some
attention of government is necessary, in order to prevent the
almost entire corruption and degeneracy of the great body of the
people.

In the progress of the division of labour, the employment of the
far greater part of those who live by labour, that is, of the
great body of the people, comes to be confined to a few very
simple operations; frequently to one or two. But the
understandings of the greater part of men are necessarily formed
by their ordinary employments. The man whose whole life is spent
in performing a few simple operations, of which the effects, too,
are perhaps always the same, or very nearly the same, has no
occasion to exert his understanding, or to exercise his
invention, in finding out expedients for removing difficulties
which never occur. He naturally loses, therefore, the habit of
such exertion, and generally becomes as stupid and ignorant as it
is possible for a human creature to become. The torpor of his
mind renders him not only incapable of relishing or bearing a
part in any rational conversation, but of conceiving any
generous, noble, or tender sentiment, and consequently of forming
any just judgment concerning many even of the ordinary duties of
private life. Of the great and extensive interests of his country
he is altogether incapable of judging; and unless very particular
pains have been taken to render him otherwise, he is equally
incapable of defending his country in war. The uniformity of his
stationary life naturally corrupts the courage of his mind, and
makes him regard, with abhorrence, the irregular, uncertain, and
adventurous life of a soldier.     It corrupts even the activity
of his body, and renders him incapable of exerting his strength
with vigour and perseverance in any other employment, than that
to which he has been bred. His dexterity at his own particular
trade seems, in this manner, to be acquired at the expense of his
intellectual, social, and martial virtues. But in every improved
and civilized society, this is the state into which the labouring
poor, that is, the great body of the people, must necessarily
fall, unless government takes some pains to prevent it.

It is otherwise in the barbarous societies, as they are commonly
called, of hunters, of shepherds, and even of husbandmen in that
rude state of husbandry which precedes the improvement of
manufactures, and the extension of foreign commerce. In such
societies, the varied occupations of every man oblige every man
to exert his capacity, and to invent expedients for removing
difficulties which are continually occurring.     Invention is
kept alive, and the mind is not suffered to fall into that drowsy
stupidity, which, in a civilized society, seems to benumb the
understanding of almost all the inferior ranks of people. In
those barbarous societies, as they are called, every man, it has
already been observed, is a warrior. Every man, too, is in some
measure a statesman, and can form a tolerable judgment concerning
the interest of the society, and the conduct of those who govern
it. How far their chiefs are good judges in peace, or good
leaders in war, is obvious to the observation of almost every
single man among them. In such a society, indeed, no man can well
acquire that improved and refined understanding which a few men
sometimes possess in a more civilized state. Though in a rude
society there is a good deal of variety in the occupations of
every individual, there is not a great deal in those of the whole
society. Every man does, or is capable of doing, almost every
thing which any other man does, or is capable of being. Every man
has a considerable degree of knowledge, ingenuity, and invention
but scarce any man has a great degree. The degree, however, which
is commonly possessed, is generally sufficient for conducting the
whole simple business of the society. In a civilized state, on
the contrary, though there is little variety in the occupations
of the greater part of individuals, there is an almost infinite
variety in those of the whole society These varied occupations
present an almost infinite variety of objects to the
contemplation of those few, who, being attached to no particular
occupation themselves, have leisure and inclination to examine
the occupations of other people. The contemplation of so great a
variety of objects necessarily exercises their minds in endless
comparisons and combinations, and renders their understandings,
in an extraordinary degree, both acute anti comprehensive. Unless
those few, however, happen to be placed in some very particular
situations, their great abilities, though honourable to
themselves, may contribute very little to the good government or
happiness of their society. Notwithstanding the great abilities
of those few, all the nobler parts of the human character may be,
in a great measure, obliterated and extinguished in the great
body of the people.

The education of the common people requires, perhaps, in a
civilized and commercial society, the attention of the public,
more than that of people of some rank and fortune. People of some
rank and fortune are generally eighteen or nineteen years of age
before they enter upon that particular business, profession, or
trade, by which they propose to distinguish themselves in the
world. They have, before that, full time to acquire, or at least
to fit themselves for afterwards acquiring, every accomplishment
which can recommend them to the public esteem, or render them
worthy of it. Their parents or guardians are generally
sufficiently anxious that they should be so accomplished, and are
in most cases, willing enough to lay out the expense which is
necessary for that purpose. If they are not always properly
educated, it is seldom from the want of expense laid out upon
their education, but from the improper application of that
expense. It is seldom from the want of masters, but from the
negligence and incapacity of the masters who are to be had, and
from the difficulty, or rather from the impossibility, which
there is, in the present state of things, of finding any better.
The employments, too, in which people of some rank or fortune
spend the greater part of their lives, are not, like those of the
common people, simple and uniform. They are almost all of them
extremely complicated, and such as exercise the head more than
the hands. The understandings of those who are engaged in such
employments, can seldom grow torpid for want of exercise. The
employments of people of some rank and fortune, besides, are
seldom such as harass them from morning to night. They generally
have a good deal of leisure, during which they may perfect
themselves in every branch, either of useful or ornamental
knowledge, of which they may have laid the foundation, or for
which they may have acquired some taste in the earlier part of
life.

It is otherwise with the common people. They have little time to
spare for education. Their parents can scarce afford to maintain
them, even in infancy. As soon as they are able to work, they
must apply to some trade, by which they can earn their
subsistence. That trade, too, is generally so simple and uniform,
as to give little exercise to the understanding; while, at the
same time, their labour is both so constant and so severe, that
it leaves them little leisure and less inclination to apply to,
or even to think of any thing else.

But though the common people cannot, in any civilized society, be
so well instructed as people of some rank and fortune; the most
essential parts of education, however, to read, write, and
account, can be acquired at so early a period of life, that the
greater part, even of those who are to be bred to the lowest
occupations, have time to acquire them before they can be
employed in those occupations. For a very small expense, the
public can facilitate, can encourage and can even impose upon
almost the whole body of the people, the necessity of acquiring
those most essential parts of education.

The public can facilitate this acquisition, by establishing in
every parish or district a little school, where children maybe
taught for a reward so moderate, that even a common labourer may
afford it ; the master being partly, but not wholly, paid by the
public ; because, if he was wholly, or even principally, paid by
it, he would soon learn to neglect his business. In Scotland, the
establishment of such parish schools has taught almost the whole
common people to read, and a very great proportion of them to
write and account. In England, the establishment of charity
schools has had an effect of the same kind, though not so
universally, because the establishmnent is not so universal. If,
in those little schools, the books by which the children are
taught to read, were a little more instructive than they commonly
are; and if, instead of a little smattering in Latin, which the
children of the common people are sometimes taught there, and
which can scarce ever be of any use to them, they were instructed
in the elementary parts of geometry and mechanics ; the literary
education of this rank of people would, perhaps, be as complete
as can be. There is scarce a common trade, which does not afford
some opportunities of applying to it the principles of geometry
and mechanics, and which would not, therefore, gradually exercise
and improve the common people in those principles, the necessary
introduction to the most sublime, as well as to the most useful
sciences.

The public can encourage the acquisition of those most essential
parts of education, by giving small premiums, and little badges
of distinction, to the children of the common people who excel in
them.

The public can impose upon almost the whole body of the people
the necessity of acquiring the most essential parts of education,
by obliging every man to undergo an examination or probation in
them, before he can obtain the freedom in any corporation, or be
allowed to set up any trade, either in a village or town
corporate.

It was in this manner, by facilitating the acquisition of their
military and gymnastic exercises, by encouraging it, and even by
imposing upon the whole body of the people the necessity of
learning those exercises, that the Greek and Roman republics
maintained the martial spirit of their respective citizens. They
facilitated the acquisition of those exercises, by appointing a
certain place for learning and practising them, and by granting
to certain masters the privilege of teaching in that place. Those
masters do not appear to have had eirher salaries or exclusive
privileges of any kind. Their reward consisted altogether in what
they got from their scholars ; and a citizen, who had learnt his
exercises in the public gymnasia, had no sort of legal advantage
over one who had learnt them privately, provided the latter had
learned them equally well. Those republics encouraged the
acquisition of those exercises, by bestowing little premiums and
badges of distinction upon those who excelled in them. To have
gained a prize in the Olympic, Isthmian, or Nemaean games, gave
illustration, not only to the person who gained it, but to his
whole family and kindred. The obligation which every citizen was
under, to serve a certain number of years, if called upon, in the
armies of the republic, sufficiently imposed the necessity of
learning those exercises, without which he could not be fit for
that service.

That in the progress of improvement, the practice of military
exercises, unless government takes proper pains to support it,
goes gradually to decay, and, together with it, the martial
spirit of the great body of the people, the example of modern
Europe sufficiently demonstrates. But the security of every
society must always depend, more or less, upon the martial spirit
of the great body of the people. In the present times, indeed,
that martial spirit alone, and unsupported by a well-disciplined
standing army, would not, perhaps, be sufficient for the defence
and security of any society. But where every citizen had the
spirit of a soldier, a smaller standing army would surely be
requisite. That spirit, besides, would necessarily diminish very
much the dangers to liberty, whether real or imaginary, which are
commonly apprehended from a standing army. As it would very much
facilitate the operations of that army against a foreign invader;
so it would obstruct them as much, if unfortunately they should
ever be directed against the constitution of the state.

The ancient institutions of Greece and Rome seem to have been
much more effectual for maintaining the martial spirit of the
great body of the people, than the establishment of what are
called the militias of modern times. They were much more simple.
When they were once established, they executed themselves, and it
required little or no attention from government to maintain them
in the most perfect vigour. Whereas to maintain, even in
tolerable execution, the complex regulations of any modern
militia, requires the continual and painful attention of
government, without which they are constantly falling into total
neglect and disuse. The influence, besides, of the ancient
institutions, was much more universal. By means of them, the
whole body of the people was completely instructed in the use of
arms ; whereas it is but a very small part of them who can ever
be so instructed by the regulations of any modern militia,
except, perhaps, that of Switzerland. But a coward, a man
incapable either of defending or of revenging himself, evidently
wants one of the most essential parts of the character of a man.
He is as much mutilated and deformed in his mind as another is in
his body, who is either deprived of some of its most essential
members, or has lost the use of them. He is evidently the more
wretched and miserable of the two; because happiness and misery,
which reside altogether in the mind, must necessarily depend more
upon the healthful or unhealthful, the mutilated or entire state
of the mind, than upon that of the body. Even though the martial
spirit of the people were of no use towards the defence of the
society, yet, to prevent that sort of mental mutilation,
deformity, and wretchedness, which cowardice necessarily involves
in it, from spreading themselves through the great body of the
people, would still deserve the most serious attention of
government; in the same manner as it would deserve its most
serious attention to prevent a leprosy, or any other loathsome
and offensive disease, though neither mortal nor dangerous, from
spreading itself among them; though, perhaps, no other public
good might result from such attention, besides the prevention of
so great a public evil.

The same thing may be said of the gross ignorance and stupidity
which, in a civilized society, seem so frequently to benumb the
understandings of all the inferior ranks of people. A man without
the proper use of the intellectual faculties of a man, is, if
possible, more contemptible than even a coward, and seems to be
mutilated and deformed in a still more essential part of the
character of human nature. Though the state was to derive no
advantage from the instruction of the inferior ranks of people,
it would still deserve its attention that they should not be
altogether uninstructed. The state, however, derives no
inconsiderable advantage from their instruction. The more they
are instructed, the less liable they are to the delusions of
enthusiasm and superstition, which, among ignorant nations
frequently occasion the most dreadful disorders. An instructed
and intelligent people, besides, are always more decent and
orderly than an ignorant and stupid one. They feel themselves,
each individually, more respectable, and more likely to obtain
the respect of their lawful superiors, and they are, therefore,
more disposed to respect those superiors. They are more disposed
to examine, and more capable of seeing through, the interested
complaints of faction and sedition; and they are, upon that
account, less apt to be misled into any wanton or unnecessary
opposition to the measures of government. In free countries,
where the safety of government depends very much upon the
favourable judgment which the people may form of its conduct, it
must surely be of the highest importance, that they should not be
disposed to judge rashly or capriciously concerning it.

Art. III.  Of the Expense of the Institutions for the
Instruction of People of all Ages.

The institutions for the instruction of people of all ages, are
chiefly those for religious instruction. This is a species of
instruction, of which the object is not so much to render the
people good citizens in this world, as to prepare them for
another and a better world in the life to come.      The teachers
of the doctrine which contains this instruction, in the same
manner as other teachers, may either depend altogether for their
subsistence upon the voluntary contributions of their hearers; or
they may derive it from some other fund, to which the law of
their country may entitle them ; such as a landed estate, a tythe
or land tax. an established salary or stipend. Their exertion,
their zeal and industry, are likely to be much greater in the
former situation than in the latter. In this respect, the
teachers of a new religion have always had a considerable
advantage in attacking those ancient and established systems, of
which the clergy, reposing themselves upon their benefices, had
neglected to keep up the fervour of faith and devotion in the
great body of the people; and having given themselves up to
indolence, were become altogether incapable of making any
vigorous exertion in defence even of their own establishment. The
clergy of an established and well endowed religion frequently
become men of learning and elegance, who possess all the virtues
of gentlemen, or which can recommend them to the esteem of
gentlemen; but they are apt gradually to lose the qualities, both
good and bad, which gave them authority and influence with the
inferior ranks of people, and which had perhaps been the original
causes of the success and establishment of their religion. Such a
clergy, when attacked by a set of popular and bold, though
perhaps stupid and ignorant enthusiasts, feel themselves as
perfectly defenceless as the indolent, effeminate, and full fed
nations of the southern parts of Asia, when they were invaded by
the active, hardy, and hungry Tartars of the north.     Such a
clergy, upon such an emergency, have commonly no other resource
than to call upon the civil magistrate to persecute, destroy, or
drive out their adversaries, as disturbers of the public peace.
It was thus that the Roman catholic clergy called upon the civil
magistrate to persecute the protestants, and the church of
England to persecute the dissenters; and that in general every
religious sect, when it has once enjoyed, for a century or two,
the security of a legal establishment, has found itself incapable
of making any vigorous defence against any new sect which chose
to attack its doctrine or discipline. Upon such occasions, the
advantage, in point of learning and good writing, may sometimes
be on the side of the established church. But the arts of
popularity, all the arts of gaining proselytes, are constantly on
the side of its adversaries.     In England, those arts have been
long neglected by the well endowed clergy of the established
church, and are at present chiefly cultivated by the dissenters
and by the methodists.     The independent provisions, however,
which in many places have been made for dissenting teachers, by
means of voluntary subscriptions, of trust rights, and other
evasions of the law, seem very much to have abated the zeal and
activity of those teachers. They have many of them become very
learned, ingenious, and respectable men; but they have in general
ceased to be very popular preachers. The methodists, without half
the learning of the dissenters, are much more in vogue.

In the church of Rome the industry and zeal of the inferior
clergy are kept more alive by the powerful motive of
self-interest, than perhaps in any established protestant church.
The parochial clergy derive many of them, a very considerable
part of their subsistence from the voluntary oblations of the
people; a source of revenue, which confession gives them many
opportunities of improving. The mendicant orders derive their
whole subsistence from such oblations. It is with them as with
the hussars and light infantry of some armies; no plunder, no
pay. The parochial clergy are like those teachers whose reward
depends partly upon their salary, and partly upon the fees or
honoraries which they get from their pupils ; and these must
always depend, more or less, upon their industry and reputation.
The mendicant orders are like those teachers whose subsistence
depends altogether upon their industry.     They are obliged,
therefore, to use every art which can animate the devotion of the
common people. The establishment of the two great mendicant
orders of St Dominic and St. Francis, it is observed by
Machiavel, revived, in the thirteenth and fourteenth centuries,
the languishing faith and devotion of the catholic church. In
Roman catholic countries, the spirit of devotion is supported
altogether by the monks, and by the poorer parochial clergy. The
great digititartes of the church, with all the accomplishments of
gentlemen and men of the world, and sometimes with those of men
of learning, are careful to maintain the necessary discipline
over their inferiors, but seldom give themselves any trouble
about the instruction of the people.

"Most of the arts and professions in a state," says by far the
most illustrious philosopher and historian of the present age,
"are of such a nature, that, while they promote the interests of
the society, they are also useful or agreeable to some
individuals; and, in that case, the constant rule of the
magistrate, except, perhaps, on the first introduction of any
art, is, to leave the profession to itself, and trust its
encouragement to the individuals who reap the benefit of it. The
artizans, finding their profits to rise by the favour of their
customers, increase, as much as possible, their skill and
industry ; and as matters are not disturbed by any injudicious
tampering, the commodity is always sure to be at all times nearly
proportioned to the demand.

" But there are also some callings which, though useful and even
necessary in a state, bring no advantage or pleasure to any
individual; and the supreme power is obliged to alter its conduct
with regard to the retainers of those professions.      It must
give them public encouragement in order to their subsistence; and
it must provide against that negligence to which they will
naturally be subject, either by annexing particular ho0nours to
profession, by establishing a long subordination of ranks, and a
strict dependence, or by some other expedient.     The persons
employed in the finances, fleets, and magistracy, are instances
of this order of men.

"It may naturally be thought, at first sight, that the
ecclesiastics belong to the first class, and that their
encouragement, as well as that of lawyers and physicians, may
safely be entrusted to the liberality of individuals, who are
attached to their doctrines. and who find benefit or consolation
from their spiritual ministry and assistance. Their industry and
vigilance will, no doubt, be whetted by such an additional
motive; and their skill in the profession, as well as their
address in governing the minds of the people, must receive daily
increase, from their increasing practice, study, and attention.


" But if we consider the matter more closely, we shall find that
this interested diligence of the clergy is what every wise
legislator will study to prevent ; because, in every religion
except the true. it is highly pernicious, and it has even a
natural tendency to pervert the truth, by infusing into it a
strong mixture of superstition, folly, and delusion.       Each
ghostly practitioner, in order to render himself more precious
and sacred in the eyes of his retainers, will inspire them with
the most violent abhorrence of all other sects, and continually
endeavour, by some novelty, to excite the languid devotion of his
audience. No regard will be paid to truth, morals, or decency, in
the doctrines inculcated. Every tenet will be adopted that best
suits the disorderly affections of the human frame. Customers
will be drawn to each conventicle by new industry and address, in
practising on the passions and credulity of the populace. And, in
the end, the civil magistrate will find that he has dearly paid
for his intended frugality, in saving a fixed establishment for
the priests ; and that, in reality, the most decent and
advantageous composition, which he can make with the spiritual
guides, is to bribe their indolence, by assigning stated salaries
to their profession, and rendering it superfluous for them to be
farther active, than merely to prevent their flock from straying
in quest of new pastors. And in this manner ecclesiastical
establishments, though commonly they arose at first from
religious views, prove in the end advantageous to the political
interests of society."

But whatever may have been the good or bad effects of the
independent provision of the clergy, it has, perhaps, been very
seldom bestowed upon them from any view to those effects.
Times of violent religious controversy have generally been times
of equally violent political faction. Upon such occasions, each
political party has either found it, or imagined it, for his
interest, to league itself with some one or other of the
contending religious sects. But this could be done only by
adopting, or, at least, by favouring the tenets of that
particular sect.      The sect which had the good fortune to be
leagued with the conquering party necessarily shared in the
victory of its ally, by whose favour and protection it was soon
enabled, in some degree, to silence and subdue all its
adversaries.     Those adversaries had generally leagued
themselves with the enemies of the conquering party, and were,
therefore the enemies of that party. The clergy of this
particular sect having thus become complete masters of the field,
and their influence and authority with the great body of the
people being in its highest vigour, they were powerful enough to
overawe the chiefs and leaders of their own party, and to oblige
the civil magistrate to respect their opinions and inclinations.
Their first demand was generally that he should silence and
subdue all their adversaries; and their second, that he should
bestow an independent provision on themselves. As they had
generally contributed a good deal to the victory, it seemed not
unreasonable that they should have some share in the spoil.
They were weary, besides, of humouring the people, and of
depending upon their caprice for a subsistence. In making this
demand, therefore, they consulted their own ease and comfort,
without troubling themselves about the effect which it might
have, in future times, upon the influence and authority of their
order.     The civil magistrate, who could comply with their
demand only by giving them something which he would have chosen
much rather to take, or to keep to himself, was seldom very
forward to grant it.      Necessity, however, always forced him
to submit at last, though frequently not till after many delays,
evasions, and affected excuses.

But if politics had never called in the aid of religion, had the
conquering party never adopted the tenets of one sect more than
those of another, when it had gained the victory, it would
probably have dealt equally and impartially with all the
different sects, and have allowed every man to choose his own
priest, and his own religion, as he thought proper. There would,
and, in this case, no doubt, have been, a great multitude of
religious sects. Almost every different congregation might
probably have had a little sect by itself, or have entertained
some peculiar tenets of its own. Each teacher, would, no doubt,
have felt himself under the necessity of making the utmost
exertion, and of using every art, both to preserve and to
increase the number of his disciples. But as every other teacher
would have felt himself under the same necessity, the success of
no one teacher, or sect of teachers, could have been very great.
The interested and active zeal of religious teachers can be
dangerous and troublesome only where there is either but one sect
tolerated in the society, or where the whole of a large society
is divided into two or three great sects; the teachers of each
acting by concert, and under a regular discipline and
subordination.     But that zeal must be altogether innocent,
where the society is divided into two or three hundred, or,
perhaps, into as many thousand small sects, of which no one could
be considerable enough to disturb the public tranquillity.
The teachers of each sect, seeing themselves surrounded on all
sides with more adversaries than friends, would be obliged to
learn that candour and moderation which are so seldom to be found
among the teachers of those great sects, whose tenets, being
supported by the civil magistrate, are held in veneration by
almost all the inhabitants of extensive kingdoms and empires, and
who, therefore, see nothing round them but followers, disciples,
and humble admirers. The teachers of each little sect, finding
themselves almost alone, would be obliged to respect those of
almost every other sect; and the concessions which they would
mutually find in both convenient and agreeable to make one to
another, might in time, probably reduce the doctrine of the
greater part of them to that pure and rational religion, free
from every mixture of absurdity, imposture, or fanaticism, such
as wise men have, in all ages of the world, wished to see
established ; but such as positive law has, perhaps, never yet
established, and probably never will establish in any country ;
because, with regard to religion, positive law always has been,
and probably always will be, more or less influenced by popular
superstition and enthusiasm.      This plan of ecclesiastical
government, or, more properly, of no ecclesiastical government,
was what the sect called Independents (a sect, no doubt, of very
wild enthusiasts), proposed to establish in England towards the
end of the civil war. If it had been established, though of a
very unphilosophical origin, it would probably, by this time,
have been productive of the most philosophical good temper and
moderation with regard to every sort of religious principle. It
has been established in Pennsylvania, where, though the quakers
happen to be the most numerous, the law, in reality, favours no
one sect more than another ; and it is there said to have been
productive of this philosophical good temper and  moderation,

But though this equality of treatment should not be productive of
this good temper and moderation in all, or even in the greater
part of the religious sects of a particular country; yet,
provided those sects were sufficiently numerous, and each of them
consequently too small to disturb the public tranquillity, the
excessive zeal of each for its particular tenets could not well
be productive of any very hurtful effects, but, on the contrary,
of several good ones; and if the government was perfectly
decided, both to let them all alone, and to oblige them all to
let alone one another, there is little danger that they would not
of their own accord, subdivide themselves fast enough, so as soon
to become sufficiently numerous.

In every civilized society, in every society where the
distinction of ranks has once been completely established, there
have been always two different schemes or systems of morality
current at the same time; of which the one may be called the
strict or austere; the other the liberal, or, if you will, the
loose system. The former is generally admired and revered by the
common people; the latter is commonly more esteemed and adopted
by what are called the people of fashion. The degree of
disapprobation with which we ought to mark the vices of levity,
the vices which are apt to arise from great prosperity, and from
the excess of gaiety and good humour, seems to constitute the
principal distinction between those two opposite schemes or
systems. In the liberal or loose system, luxury, wanton, and even
disorderly mirth, the pursuit of pleasure to some degree of
intemperance, the breach of chastity, at least in one of the two
sexes, etc. provided they are not accompanied with gross
indecency, and do not lead to falsehood and injustice, are
generally treated with a good deal of indulgence, and are easily
either excused or pardoned altogether. In the austere system, on
the contrary, those excesses are regarded with the utmost
abhorrence and detestation. The vices of levity are always
ruinous to the common people, and a single week's thoughtlessness
and dissipation is often sufficient to undo a poor workman for
ever, and to drive him, through despair, upon committing the most
enormous crimes. The wiser and better sort of the common people,
therefore, have always the utmost abhorrence and detestation of
such excesses, which their experience tells them are so
immediately fatal to people of their condition. The disorder and
extravagance of several years, on the contrary, will not always
ruin a man of fashion ; and people of that rank are very apt to
consider the power of indulging in some degree of excess, as one
of the advantages of their fortune ; and the liberty of doing so
without censure or reproach, as one of the privileges which
belong to their station. In people of their own station,
therefore, they regard such excesses with but a small degree of
disapprobation, and censure them either very slightly or not at
all.

Almost all religious sects have begun among the common people,
from whom they have generally drawn their earliest, as well as
their most numerous proselytes. The austere system of morality
has, accordingly, been adopted by those sects almost constantly,
or with very few exceptions; for there have been some. It was the
system by which they could best recommend themselves to that
order of people, to whom they first proposed their plan of
reformation upon what had been before established. Many of them,
perhaps the greater part of them, have even endeavoured to gain
credit by refining upon this austere system, and by carrying it
to some degree of folly and extravagance; and this excessive
rigour has frequently recommended them, more than any thing else,
to the respect and veneration of the common people.

A man of rank and fortune is, by his station, the distinguished
member of a great society, who attend to every part of his
conduct, and who thereby oblige him to attend to every  part of
it himself. His authority and consideration depend very much upon
the respect which this society bears to him. He dares not do
anything which would disgrace or discredit him in it; and he is
obliged to a very strict observation of that species of morals,
whether liberal or austere, which the general consent of this
society prescribes to persons of his rank and fortune. A man of
low condition, on the contrary, is far from being a distinguished
member of any great society. While he remains in a country
village, his conduct may be attended to, and he may be obliged to
attend to it himself. In this situation, and in this situation
only, he may have what is called a character to lose. But as soon
as he comes into a great city, he is sunk in obscurity and
darkness. His conduct is observed and attended to by nobody; and
he is, therefore, very likely to neglect it himself, and to
abandon himself to every sort of low profligacy and vice. He
never emerges so effectually from this obscurity, his conduct
never excites so much the attention of any respectable society,
as by his becoming the member of a small religious sect. He from
that moment acquires a degree of consideration which he never had
before. All his brother sectaries are, for the credit of the
sect, interested to observe his conduct; and, if he gives
occasion to any scandal, if he deviates very much from those
austere morals which they almost always require of one another,
to punish him by what is always a very severe punishment, even
where no evil effects attend it, expulsion or excommunication
from the sect. In little religious sects, accordingly, the morals
of the common people have been almost always remarkably regular
and orderly ; generally much more so than in the established
church. The morals of those little sects, indeed, have frequently
been rather disagreeably rigorous and unsocial.

There are two very easy and effectual remedies, however, by whose
joint operation the state might, without violence, correct
whatever was unsocial or disagreeably rigorous in the morals of
all the little sects into which the country was divided.

The first of those remedies is the study of science and
philosophy, which the state might render almost universal among
all people of middling or more than middling rank and fortune ;
not by giving salaries to teachers in order to make them
negligent and idle, but by instituting some sort of probation,
even in the higher and more difficult sciences, to be undergone
by every person before he was permitted to exercise any liberal
profession, or before he could be received as a candidate for any
honourable office, of trust or profit. if the state imposed upon
this order of men the necessity of learning, it would have no
occasion to give itself any trouble about providing them with
proper teachers.      They would soon find better teachers for
themselves, than any whom the state could provide for them.
Science is the great antidote to the poison of enthusiasm and
superstition; and where all the superior ranks of people were
secured from it, the inferior ranks could not be much exposed to
it.

The second of those remedies is the frequency and gaiety of
public diversions. The state, by encouraging, that is, by giving
entire liberty to all those who, from their own interest, would
attempt, without scandal or indecency, to amuse and divert the
people by painting, poetry, music, dancing; by all sorts of
dramatic representations and exhibitions; would easily dissipate,
in the greater part of them, that melancholy and gloomy humour
which is almost always the nurse of popular superstition and
enthusiasm. Public diversions have always been the objects of
dread and hatred to all the fanatical promoters of those popular
frenzies. The gaiety and good humour which those diversions
inspire, were altogether inconsistent with that temper of mind
which was fittest for their purpose, or which they could best
work upon. Dramatic representations, besides, frequently exposing
their artifices to public ridicule, and sometimes even to public
execration, were, upon that account, more than all other
diversions, the objects of their peculiar abhorrence.

In a country where the law favoured the teachers of no one
religion more than those of another, it would not be necessary
that any of them should have any particular or immediate
dependency upon the sovereign or executive power ; or that he
should have anything to do either in appointing or in dismissing
them from their offices. In such a situation, he would have no
occasion to give himself any concern about them, further than to
keep the peace among them, in the same manner as among the rest
of his subjects, that is, to hinder them from persecuting,
abusing, or oppressing one another.      But it is quite
otherwise in countries where there is an established or governing
religion.     The sovereign can in this case never be secure,
unless he has the means of influencing in a considerable degree
the greater part of the teachers of that religion.

The clergy of every established church constitute a great
incorporation. They can act in concert, and pursue their interest
upon one plan, and with one spirit as much as if they were under
the direction of one man ; and they are frequently, too, under
such direction.     Their interest as an incorporated body is
never the same with that of the sovereign, and is sometimes
directly opposite to it. Their great interest is to maintain
their authority with the people, and this authority depends upon
the supposed certainty and importance of the whole doctrine which
they inculcate, and upon the supposed necessity of adopting every
part of it with the most implicit faith, in order to avoid
eternal misery. Should the sovereign have the imprudence to
appear either to deride, or doubt himself of the most trifling
part of their doctrine, or from humanity, attempt to protect
those who did either the one or the other, the punctilious honour
of a clergy, who have no sort of dependency upon him, is
immediately provoked to proscribe him as a profane person, and to
employ all the terrors of religion, in order to oblige the people
to transfer their allegiance to some more orthodox and obedient
prince. Should he oppose any of their pretensions or usurpations,
the danger is equally great. The princes who have dared in this
manner to rebel against the church, over and above this crime of
rebellion, have generally been charged, too, with the additional
crime of heresy, notwithstanding their solemn protestations of
their faith, and humble submission to every tenet which she
thought proper to prescribe to them. But the authority of
religion is superior to every other authority. The fears which it
suggests conquer all other fears. When the authorized teachers of
religion propagate through the great body of the people,
doctrines subversive of the authority of the sovereign, it is by
violence only, or by the force of a standing army, that he can
maintain his authority. Even a standing army cannot in this case
give him any lasting security ; because if the soldiers are not
foreigners, which can seldom be the case, but drawn from the
great body of the people, which must almost always be the case,
they are likely to be soon corrupted by those very doctrines. The
revolutions which the turbulence of the Greek clergy was
continually occasioning at Constantinople, as long as the eastern
empire subsisted; the convulsions which, during the course of
several centuries, the turbulence of the Roman clergy was
continually occasioning in every part of Europe, sufficiently
demonstrate how precarious and insecure must always be the
situation of the sovereign, who has no proper means of
influencing the clergy of the established and governing religion
of his country.

Articles of faith, as well as all other spiritual matters, it is
evident enough, are not within the proper department of a
temporal sovereign, who, though he may be very well qualified for
protecting, is seldom supposed to be so for instructing the
people. With regard to such matters, therefore, his authority can
seldom be sufficient to counterbalance the united authority of
the clergy of the established church.      The public
tranquillity, however, and his own security, may frequently
depend upon the doctrines which they may think proper to
propagate concerning such matters. As he can seldom directly
oppose their decision, therefore, with proper weight and
authority, it is necessary that he should be able to influence it
; and he can influence it only by the fears and expectations
which he may excite in the greater part of the individuals of the
order. Those fears and expectations may consist in the fear of
deprivation or other punishment, and in the expectation of
further preferment.

In all Christian churches, the benefices of the clergy are a sort
of freeholds, which they enjoy, not during pleasure, but during
life or good behaviour.     If they held them by a more
precarious tenure, and were liable to be turned out upon every
slight disobligation either of the sovereign or of his ministers,
it would perhaps be impossible for them to maintain their
authority with the people, who would then consider them as
mercenary dependents upon the court, in the sincerity of whose
instructions they could no longer have any confidence. But should
the sovereign attempt irregularly, and by violence, to deprive
any number of clergymen of their freeholds, on account, perhaps,
of their having propagated, with more than ordinary zeal, some
factious or seditious doctrine, he would only render, by such
persecution, both them and their doctrine ten times more popular,
and therefore ten times more troublesome and dangerous, than they
had been before. Fear is in almost all cases a wretched
instrument of govermnent, and ought in particular never to be
employed against any order of men who have the smallest
pretensions to independency. To attempt to terrify them, serves
only to irritate their bad humour, and to confirm them in an
opposition, which more gentle usage, perhaps, might easily induce
them either to soften, or to lay aside altogether. The violence
which the French government usually employed in order to oblige
all their parliaments, or sovereign courts of justice, to
enregister any unpopular edict, very seldom succeeded. The means
commonly employed, however, the imprisonment of all the
refractory members, one would think, were forcible enough. The
princes of the house of Stuart sometimes employed the like means
in order to influence some of the members of the parliament of
England, and they generally found them equally intractable. The
parliament of England is now managed in another manner ; and a
very small experiment, which the duke of Choiseul made, about
twelve years ago, upon the parliament of Paris, demonstrated
sufficiently that all the parliaments of France might have been
managed still more easily in the same manner. That experiment was
not pursued.     For though management and persuasion are always
the easiest and safest instruments of government as force and
violence are the worst and the most dangerous; yet such, it
seems, is the natural insolence of man, that he almost always
disdains to use the good instrument, except when he cannot or
dare not use the bad one. The French government could and durst
use force, and therefore disdained to use management and
persuasion. But there is no order of men, it appears I believe,
from the experience of all ages, upon whom it is so dangerous or
rather so perfectly ruinous, to employ force and violence, as
upon the respected clergy of an established church.     The
rights, the privileges, the personal liberty of every individual
ecclesiastic, who is upon good terms with his own order, are,
even in the most despotic governments, more respected than those
of any other person of nearly equal rank and fortune. It is so in
every gradation of despotism, from that of the gentle and mild
government of Paris, to that of the violent and furious
government of Constantinople. But though this order of men can
scarce ever be forced, they may be managed as easily as any other
; and the security of the sovereign, as well as the public
tranquillity, seems to depend very much upon the means which he
has of managing them ; and those means seem to consist altogether
in the preferment which he has to bestow upon them.

In the ancient constitution of the Christian church, the bishop
of each diocese was elected by the joint votes of the clergy and
of the people of the episcopal city. The people did not long
retain their right of election; and while they did retain it,
they almost always acted under the influence of the clergy, who,
in such spiritual matters, appeared to be their natural guides.
The clergy, however, soon grew weary of the trouble of managimg
them, and found it easier to elect their own bishops themselves.
The abbot, in the same manner, was elected by the monks of the
monastery, at least in the greater part of abbacies. All the
inferior ecclesiastical benefices comprehended within the diocese
were collated by the bishop, who bestowed them upon such
ecclesiastics as he thought proper. All church preferments were
in this manner in the disposal of the church.     The sovereign,
though he might have some indirect influence in those elections,
and though it was sometimes usual to ask both his consent to
elect, and his approbation of the election, yet had no direct or
sufficient means of managing the clergy. The ambition of every
clergyman naturally led him to pay court, not so much to his
sovereign as to his own order, from which only he could expect
preferment.

Through the greater part of Europe, the pope gradually drew to
himself, first the collation of almost all bishoprics and
abbacies, or of what were called consistorial benefices, and
afterwards, by various machinations and pretences, of the greater
part of inferior benefices comprehended within each diocese,
little more being left to the bishop than what was barely
necessary to give him a decent authority with his own clergy. By
this arrangement the condition of the sovereign was still worse
than it had been before. The clergy of all the different
countries of Europe were thus formed into a sort of spiritual
army, dispersed in different quarters indeed, but of which all
the movements and operations could now be directed by one head,
and conducted upon one uniform plan. The clergy of each
particular country might be considered as a particular detachment
of that army, of which the operations could easily be supported
and seconded by all the other detachments quartered in the
different countries round about. Each detachment was not only
independent of the sovereign of the country in which it was
quartered, and by which it was maintained, but dependent upon a
foreign sovereign, who could at any time turn its arms against
the sovereign of that particular country, and support them by the
arms of all the other detachments.

Those arms were the most formidable that can well be imagined. In
the ancient state of Europe, before the establishment of arts and
manufactures, the wealth of the clergy gave them the same sort of
influence over the common people which that of the great barons
gave them over their respective vassals, tenants, and retainers.
In the great landed estates, which the mistaken piety both of
princes and private persons had bestowed upon the church,
jurisdictions were established, of the same kind with those of
the great barons, and for the same reason. In those great landed
estates, the clergy, or their bailiffs, could easily keep the
peace, without the support or assistance either of the king or of
any other person; and neither the king nor any other person could
keep the peace there without the support and assistance of the
clergy. The jurisdictions of the clergy, therefore, in their
particular baronies or manors, were equally independent, and
equally exclusive of the authority of the king's courts, as those
of the great temporal lords. The tenants of the clergy were, like
those of the great barons, almost all tenants at will, entirely
dependent upon their immediate lords, and, therefore, liable to
be called out at pleasure, in order to fight in any quarrel in
which the clergy might think proper to engage them. Over and
above the rents of those estates, the clergy possessed in the
tithes a very large portion of the rents of all the other estates
in every kingdom of Europe. The revenues arising from both those
species of rents were, the greater part of them, paid in kind, in
corn, wine, cattle, poultry, etc. The quantity exceeded greatly
what the clergy could themselves consume; and there were neither
arts nor manufactures, for the produce of which they could
exchange the surplus. The clergy could derive advantage from this
immense surplus in no other way than by employing it, as the
great barons employed the like surplus of their revenues, in the
most profuse hospitality, and in the most extensive charity. Both
the hospitality and the charity of the ancient clergy,
accordingly, are said to have been very great. They not only
maintained almost the whole poor of every kingdom, but many
knights and gentlemen had frequently no other means of
subsistence than by travelling about from monastery to monastery,
under pretence of devotion, but in reality to enjoy the
hospitality of the clergy. The retainers of some particular
prelates were often as numerous as those of the greatest
lay-lords ; and the retainers of all the clergy taken together
were, perhaps, more numerous than those of all the lay-lords.
There was always much more union among the clergy than among the
lay-lords. The former were under a regular discipline and
subordination to the papal authority. The latter were under no
regular discipline or subordination, but almost always equally
jealous of one another, and of the king. Though the tenants and
retainers of the clergy, therefore, had both together been less
numerous than those of the great lay-lords, and their tenants
were probably much less numerous, yet their union would have
rendered them more formidable. The hospitality and charity of the
clergy, too, not only gave them the command of a great temporal
force, but increased very much the weight of their spiritual
weapons. Those virtues procured them the highest respect and
veneration among all the inferior ranks of people, of whom many
were constantly, and almost all occasionally, fed by them.
Everything belonging or related to so popular an order, its
possessions, its privileges, its doctrines, necessarily appeared
sacred in the eyes of the common people; and every violation of
them, whether real or pretended, the highest act of sacrilegious
wickedness and profaneness. In this state of things, if the
sovereign frequently found it difficult to resist the confederacy
of a few of the great nobility, we cannot wonder that he should
find it still more so to resist the united force of the clergy of
his own dominions, supported by that of the clergy of all the
neighbouring dominions. In such circumstances, the wonder is, not
that he was sometimes obliged to yield, but that he ever was able
to resist.

The privileges of the clergy in those ancient times (which to
us, who live in the present times, appear the most absurd), their
total exemption from the secular jurisdiction, for example, or
what in England was called the benefit ofclergy, were the
natural, or rather the necessary, consequences of this state of
things. How dangerous must it have been for the sovereign to
attempt to punish a clergyman for any crime whatever, if his
order were disposed to protect him, and to represent either the
proof as insufficient for convicting so holy a man, or the
punishment as too severe to be inflicted upon one whose person
had been rendered sacred by religion ? The sovereign could, in
such circumstances, do no better than leave him to be tried by
the ecclesiastical courts, who, for the honour of their own
order, were interested to restrain, as much as possible, every
member of it from committing enormous crimes, or even from giving
occasion to such gross scandal as might disgust the minds of the
people.

In the state in which things were, through the greater part of
Europe, during the tenth, eleventh, twelfth, and thirteenth
centuries, and for some time both before and after that period,
the constitution of the church of Rome may be considered as the
most formidable combination that ever was formed against the
authority and security of civil government, as well as against
the liberty, reason, and happiness of mankind, which can flourish
only where civil government is able to protect them. In that
constitution, the grossest delusions of superstition were
supported in such a manner by the private interests of so great a
number of people, as put them out of all danger from any assault
of human reason; because, though human reason might, perhaps,
have been able to unveil, even to the eyes of the common people,
some of the delusions of superstition, it could never have
dissolved the ties of private interest. Had this constitution
been attacked by no other enemies but the feeble efforts of human
reason, it must have endured for ever. But that immense and
well-built fabric, which all the wisdom and virtue of man could
never have shaken, much less have overturned, was, by the natural
course of things, first weakened, and afterwards in part
destroyed; and is now likely, in the course of a few centuries
more, perhaps, to crumble into ruins altogether.

The gradual improvements of arts, manufactures, and commerce, the
same causes which destroyed the power of the great barons,
destroyed, in the same manner, through the greater part of
Europe, the whole temporal manufactures, and commerce, the
clergy, like the great barons, found something for which they
could exchange their rude produce, and thereby discovered the
means of spending their whole revenues upon their own persons,
without giving any considerable share of them to other people.
Their charity became gradually less extensive, their hospitality
less liberal, or less profuse. Their retainers became
consequently less numerous, and, by degrees, dwindled away
altogether. The clergy, too, like the great barons, wished to get
a better rent from their landed estates, in order to spend it, in
the same manner, upon the gratification of their own private
vanity and folly. But this increase of rent could be got only by
granting leases to their tenants, who thereby became, in a great
measure, independent of them. The ties of interest, which bound
the inferior ranks of people to the clergy, were in this manner
gradually broken and dissolved. They were even broken and
dissolved sooner than those which bound the same ranks of people
to the great barons ; because the benefices of the church being,
the greater part of them, much smaller than the estates of the
great barons, the possessor of each benefice was much sooner able
to spend the whole of its revenue upon his own person. During the
greater part of the fourteenth and fifteenth centuries, the power
of the great barons was, through the greater part of Europe, in
full vigour. But the temporal power of the clergy, the absolute
command which they had once had over the great body of the people
was very much decayed. The power of the church was, by that time,
very nearly reduced, through the greater part of Europe, to what
arose from their spiritual authority ; and even that spiritual
authority was much weakened, when it ceased to he supported by
the charity and hospitality of the clergy. The inferior ranks of
people no longer looked upon that order as they had done before;
as the comforters of their distress, and the relievers of their
indigence. On the contrary, they were provoked and disgusted by
the vanity, luxury, and expense of the richer clergy, who
appeared to spend upon their own pleasures what had always before
been regarded as the patrimony of the poor.

In this situation of things, the sovereigns in the different
states of Europe endeavoured to recover the influence which they
had once had in the disposal of the great benefices of the
church; by procuring to the deans and chapters of each diocese
the restoration of their ancient right of electing the bishop ;
and to the monks of each abbacy that of electing the abbot. The
re-establishing this ancient order was the object of several
statutes enacted in England during the course of the fourteenth
century, particularly of what is called the statute of provisors
; and of the pragmatic sanction, established in France in the
fifteenth century. In order to render the election valid, it was
necessary that the sovereign should both consent to it before
hand, and afterwards approve of the person elected; and though
the election was still supposed to be free, he had, however all
the indirect means which his situation necessarily afforded him,
of influencing the clergy in his own dominions. Other
regulations, of a similar tendency, were established in other
parts of Europe. But the power of the pope, in the collation of
the great benefices of the church, seems, before the reformation,
to have been nowhere so effectually and so universally restrained
as in France and England. The concordat afterwards, in the
sixteenth century, gave to the kings of France the absolute right
of presenting to all the great, or what are called the
consistorial, benefices of the Gallican church.

Since the establishment of the pragmatic sanction and of the
concordat, the clergy of France have in general shewn less
respect to the decrees of the papal court, than the clergy of any
other catholic country. In all the disputes which their sovereign
has had with the pope, they have almost constantly taken part
with the former. This independency of the clergy of France upon
the court of Rome seems to be principally founded upon the
pragmatic sanction and the concordat. In the earlier periods of
the monarchy, the clergy of France appear to have been as much
devoted to the pope as those of any other country. When Robert,
the second prince of the Capetian race, was most unjustly
excommunicated by the court of Rome, his own servants, it is
said, threw the victuals which came from his table to the dogs,
and refused to taste any thing themselves which had been polluted
by the contact of a person in his situation. They were taught to
do so, it may very safely be presumed, by the clergy of his own
dominions.

The claim of collating to the great benefices of the church, a
claim in defence of which the court of Rome had frequently
shaken, and sometimes overturned, the thrones of some of the
greatest sovereigns in Christendom, was in this manner either
restrained or modified, or given up altogether, in many different
parts of Europe, even before the time of the reformation. As the
clergy had now less influence over the people, so the state had
more influence over the clergy. The clergy, therefore, had both
less power, and less inclination, to disturb the state.

The authority of the church of Rome was in this state of
declension, when the disputes which gave birth to the reformation
began in Germany, and soon spread themselves through every part
of Europe. The new doctrines were everywhere received with a high
degree of popular favour. They were propagated with all that
enthusiastic zeal which commonly animates the spirit of party,
when it attacks established authority. The teachers of those
doctrines, though perhaps, in other respects, not more learned
than many of the divines who defended the established church,
seem in general to have been better acquainted with
ecclesiastical history, and with the origin and progress of that
system of opinions upon which the authority of the church was
established ; and they had thereby the advantage in almost every
dispute. The austerity of their manners gave them authority with
the common people, who contrasted the strict regularity of their
conduct with the disorderly lives of the greater part of their
own clergy. They possessed, too, in a much higher degree than
their adversaries, all the arts of popularity and of gaining
proselytes; arts which the lofty and dignified sons of the church
had long neglected, as being to them in a great measure useless.
The reason of the new doctrines recommended them to some, their
novelty to many; the hatred and contempt of the established
clergy to a still greater number: but the zealous, passionate,
and fanatical, though frequently coarse and rustic eloquence,
with which they were almost everywhere inculcated, recommended
them to by far the greatest number.

The success of the new doctrines was almost everywhere so great,
that the princes, who at that time happened to be on bad terms
with the court of Rome, were, by means of them, easily enabled,
in their own dominions, to overturn the church, which having lost
the respect and veneration of the inferior ranks of people, could
make scarce any resistance. The court of Rome had disobliged some
of the smaller princes in the northern parts of Germany, whom it
had probably considered as too insignificant to be worth the
managing. They universally, therefore, established the
reformation in their own dominions. The tyranny of Christiern
II., and of Troll archbishop of Upsal, enabled Gustavus Vasa to
expel them both from Sweden. The pope favoured the tyrant and the
archbishop, and Gustavus Vasa found no difficulty in establishing
the reformation in Sweden. Christiern II. was afterwards deposed
from the throne of Denmark, where his conduct had rendered him as
odious as in Sweden. The pope, however, was still disposed to
favour him; and Frederic of Holstein, who had mounted the throne
in his stead, revenged himself, by following the example of
Gustavus Vasa. The magistrates of Berne and Zurich, who had no
particular quarrel with the pope, established with great ease the
reformation in their respective cantons, where just before some
of the clergy had, by an imposture somewhat grosser than
ordinary, rendered the whole order both odious and contemptible.

In this critical situation of its affairs the papal court was at
sufficient pains to cultivate the friendship of the powerful
sovereigns of France and Spain, of whom the latter was at that
time emperor of Germany. With their assistance, it was enabled,
though not without great difficulty, and much bloodshed, either
to suppress altogether, or to obstruct very much, the progress of
the reformation in their dominions. It was well enough inclined,
too, to be complaisant to the king of England. But from the
circumstances of the times, it could not be so without giving
offence to a still greater sovereign, Charles V., king of Spain
and emperor of Germany. Henry VIII., accordingly, though he did
not embrace himself the greater part of the doctrines of the
reformation, was yet enabled, by their general prevalence, to
suppress all the monasteries, and to abolish the authority of the
church of Rome in his dominions.      That he should go so far,
though he went no further, gave some satisfaction to the patrons
of the reformation, who, having got possession of the government
in the reign of his son and successor completed, without any
difficulty, the work which Henry VIII. had begun.

In some countries, as in Scotland, where the government was weak,
unpopular, and not very firmly established, the reformation was
strong enough to overturn, not only the church, but the state
likewise, for attempting to support the church.

Among the followers of the reformation, dispersed in all the
different countries of Europe, there was no general tribunal,
which, like that of the court of Rome, or an oecumenical council,
could settle all disputes among them, and, with irresistible
authority, prescribe to all of them the precise limits of
orthodoxy. When the followers of the reformation in one country,
therefore, happened to differ from their brethren in another, as
they had no common judge to appeal to, the dispute could never be
decided; and many such disputes arose among them.     Those
concerning the government of the church, and the right of
conferring ecclesiastical benefices, were perhaps the most
interesting to the peace and welfare of civil society.     They
gave birth, accordingly, to the two principal parties or sects
among the followers of the reformation, the Lutheran and
Calvinistic sects, the only sects among them, of which the
doctrine and discipline have ever yet been established by law in
any part of Europe.

The followers of Luther, together with what is called the church
of England, preserved more or less of the episcopal government,
established subordination among the clergy, gave the sovereign
the disposal of all the bishoprics, and other consistorial
benefices within his dominions, and thereby rendered him the real
head of the church; and without depriving the bishop of the right
of collating to the smaller benefices within his diocese, they,
even to those benefices, not only admitted, but favoured the
right of presentation, both in the sovereign and in all other lay
patrons. This system of church government was, from the
beginning, favourable to peace and good order, and to submission
to the civil sovereign.      It has never, accordingly, been the
occasion of any tumult or civil commotion in any country in which
it has once been established.     The church of England, in
particular, has always valued herself, with great reason, upon
the unexceptionable loyalty of her principles. Under such a
government, the clergy naturally endeavour to recommend
themselves to the sovereign, to the court, and to the nobility
and gentry of the country, by whose influence they chiefly expect
to obtain preferment. They pay court to those patrons, sometimes,
no doubt, by the vilest flattery and assentation ; but
fruquently, too, by cultivating all those arts which best
deserve, and which are therefore most likely to gain them, the
esteem of people of rank and fortune; by their knowledge in all
the different branches of useful and ornamental learning, by the
decent liberality of their manners, by the social good humour of
their conversation, and by their avowed contempt of those absurd
and hypocritical austerities which fanatics inculcate and pretend
to practise, in order to draw upon themselves the veneration, and
upon the greater part of men of rank and fortune, who avow that
they do not practise them, the abhorrence of the common people.
Such a clergy, however, while they pay their court in this manner
to the higher ranks of life, are very apt to neglect altogether
the means of maintaining their influence and authority with the
lower. They are listened to, esteemed, and respected by their
superiors; but before their inferiors they are frequently
incapable of defending, effectually, and to the conviction of
such hearers, their own sober and moderate doctrines, against the
most ignorant enthusiast who chooses to attack them.

The followers of Zuinglius, or more properly those of Calvin, on
the contrary, bestowed upon the people of each parish, whenever
the church became vacant, the right of electing their own pastor;
and established, at the same time, the most perfect equality
among the clergy. The former part of this institution, as long as
it remained in vigour, seems to have been productive of nothing
but disorder and confusion, and to have tended equally to corrupt
the morals both of the clergy and of the people. The latter part
seems never to have had any effects but what were perfectly
agreeable.

As long as the people of each parish preserved the right of
electing their own pastors, they acted almost always under the
influence of the clergy, and generally of the most factious and
fanatical of the order. The clergy, in order to preserve their
influence in those popular elections, became, or affected to
become, many of them, fanatics themselves, encouraged fanaticism
among the people, and gave the preference almost always to the
most fanatical candidate. So small a matter as the appointment of
a parish priest, occasioned almost always a violent contest, not
only in one parish, but in all the neighbouring parishes who
seldom failed to take part in the quarrel. When the parish
happened to be situated in a great city, it divided all the
inhabitants into two parties; and when that city happened, either
to constitute itself a little republic, or to be the head and
capital of a little republic, as in the case with many of the
considerable cities in Switzerland and Holland, every paltry
dispute of this kind, over and above exasperating the animosity
of all their other factions, threatened to leave behind it, both
a new schism in the church, and a new faction in the state.
In those small republics, therefore, the magistrate very soon
found it necessary, for the sake of preserving the public peace,
to assume to himself the right of presenting to all vacant
benefices.      In Scotland, the most extensive country in which
this presbyterian form of church government has ever been
established, the rights of patronage were in effect abolished by
the act which established presbytery in the beginning of the
reign of William III. That act, at least, put in the power of
certain classes of people in each parish to purchase, for a very
small price, the right of electing their own pastor.     The
constitution which this act established, was allowed to subsist
for about two-and-twenty years, but was abolished by the 10th of
queen Anne, ch.12, on account of the confusions and disorders
which this more popular mode of election had almost everywhere
occasioned. In so extensive a country as Scotland, however, a
tumult in a remote parish was not so likely to give disturbance
to government as in a smaller state. The 10th of queen Anne
restored the rights of patronage. But though, in Scotland, the
law gives the benefice, without any exception to the person
presented by the patron; yet the church requires sometimes (for
she has not in this respect been very uniform in her decisions) a
certain concurrence of the people, before she will confer upon
the presentee what is called the cure of souls, or the
ecclesiastical jurisdiction in the parish. She sometimes, at
least, from an affected concern for the peace of the parish,
delays the settlement till this concurrence can be procured. The
private tampering of some of the neighbouring clergy, sometimes
to procure, but more frequently to prevent this concurrence, and
the popular arts which they cultivate, in order to enable them
upon such occasions to tamper more effectually, are perhaps the
causes which principally keep up whatever remains of the old
fanatical spirit, either in the clergy or in the people of
Scotland.

The equality which the presbyterian form of church government
establishes among the clergy, consists, first, in the equality of
authority or ecclesiastical jurisdiction; and, secondly, in the
equality of benefice. In all presbyterian churches, the equality
of authority is perfect; that of benefice is not so. The
difference, however, between one benefice and another, is seldom
so considerable, as commonly to tempt the possessor even of the
small one to pay court to his patron, by the vile arts of
flattery and assentation, in order to get a better. In all the
presbyterian churches, where the rights of patronage are
thoroughly established, it is by nobler and better arts, that the
established clergy in general endeavour to gain the favour of
their superiors; by their learning, by the irreproachable
regularity of their life, and by the faithful and diligent
discharge of their duty. Their patrons even frequently complain
of the independency of their spirit, which they are apt to
construe into ingratitude for past favours, but which, at worse,
perhaps, is seldom anymore than that indifference which naturally
arises from the consciousness that no further favours of the kind
are ever to be expected.     There is scarce, perhaps, to be
found anywhere in Europe, a more learned, decent, independent,
and respectable set of men, than the greater part of the
presbyterian clergy of Holland, Geneva, Switzerland, and
Scotland.

Where the church benefices are all nearly equal, none of them can
be very great; and this mediocrity of benefice, though it may be,
no doubt, carried too far, has, however, some very agreeable
effects.     Nothing but exemplary morals can give dignity to a
man of small fortune.     The vices of levity and vanity
necessarily render him ridiculous, and are, besides, almost as
ruinous to him as they are to the common people. In his own
conduct, therefore, he is obliged to follow that system of morals
which the common people respect the most. He gains their esteem
and affection, by that plan of life which his own interest and
situation would lead him to follow. The common people look upon
him with that kindness with which we naturally regard one who
approaches somewhat to our own condition, but who, we think,
ought to be in a higher.      Their kindness naturally provokes
his kindness. He becomes careful to instruct them, and attentive
to assist and relieve them. He does not even despise the
prejudices of people who are disposed to be so favourable to him,
and never treats them with those contemptuous and arrogant airs,
which we so often meet with in the proud dignitaries of opulent
and well endowed churches. The presbyterian clergy, accordingly,
have more influence over the minds of the common people, than
perhaps the clergy of any other established church. It is,
accordingly, in presbyterian countries only, that we ever find
the common people converted, without persecution completely, and
almost to a man, to the established church.

In countries where church benefices are, the greater part of
them, very moderate, a chair in a university is generally a
better establishment than a church benefice.      The
universities have, in this case, the picking and chusing of their
members from all the churchmen of the country, who, in every
country, constitute by far the most numerous class of men of
letters. Where church benefices, on the contrary, are many of
them very considerable, the church naturally draws from the
universities the greater part of their eminent men of letters;
who generally find some patron, who does himself honour by
procuring them church preferment.     In the former situation, we
are likely to find the universities filled with the most eminent
men of letters that are to be found in the country. In the
latter, we are likely to find few eminent men among them, and
those few among the youngest members of the society, who are
likely, too, to be drained away from it, before they can have
acquired experience and knowledge enough to be of much use to it.
It is observed by Mr. de Voltaire, that father Pore, a jesuit of
no great eminence in the republic of letters, was the only
professor they had ever had in France, whose works were worth the
reading. In a country which has produced so many eminent men of
letters, it must appear somewhat singular, that scarce one of
them should have been a professor in a university. The famous
Cassendi was, in the beginning of his life, a professor in the
university of Aix. Upon the first dawning of his genius, it was
represented to him, that by going into the church he could easily
find a much more quiet and comfortable subsistence, as well as a
better situation for pursuing his studies; and he immediately
followed the advice.     The observation of Mr. de Voltaire may
be applied, I believe, not only to France, but to all other Roman
Catholic countries. We very rarely find in any of them an eminent
man of letters, who is a professor in a university, except,
perhaps, in the professions of law and physic; professions from
which the church is not so likely to draw them. After the church
of Rome, that of England is by far the richest and best endowed
church in Christendom. In England, accordingly, the church is
continually draining the universities of all their best and
ablest members; and an old college tutor who is known and
distinguished in Europe as an eminent man of letters, is as
rarely to be found there as in any Roman catholic country, In
Geneva, on the contrary, in the protestant cantons of
Switzerland, in the protestant countries of Germany, in Holland,
in Scotland, in Sweden, and Denmark, the most eminent men of
letters whom those countries have produced, have, not all indeed,
but the far greater part of them, been professors in
universities. In those countries, the universities are
continually draining the church of all its most eminent men of
letters.

It may, perhaps, be worth while to remark, that, if we except the
poets, a few orators, and a few historians, the far greater part
of the other eminent men of letters, both of Greece and Rome,
appear to have been either public or private teachers; generally
either of philosophy or of rhetoric.     This remark will be
found to hold true, from the days of Lysias and Isocrates, of
Plato and Aristotle, down to those of Plutarch and Epictetus,
Suetonius, and Quintilian. To impose upon any man the necessity
of teaching, year after year, in any particular branch of science
seems in reality to be the most effectual method for rendering
him completely master of it himself.     By being obliged to go
every year over the same ground, if he is good for any thing, he
necessarily becomes, in a few years, well acquainted with every
part of it. and if, upon any particular point, he should form too
hasty an opinion one year, when he comes, in the course of his
lectures to reconsider the same subject the year thereafter, he
is very likely to correct it. As to be a teacher of science is
certainly the natural employment of a mere man of letters ; so is
it likewise, perhaps, the education which is most likely to
render him a man of solid learning and knowledge. The mediocrity
of church benefices naturally tends to draw the greater part of
men of letters in the country where it takes place, to the
employment in which they can be the most useful to the public,
and at the same time to give them the best education, perhaps,
they are capable of receiving. It tends to render their learning
both as solid as possible, and as useful as possible.

The revenue of every established church, such parts of it
excepted as may arise from particular lands or manors, is a
branch, it ought to be observed, of the general revenue of the
state, which is thus diverted to a purpose very different from
the defence of the state. The tithe, for example, is a real land.
tax, which puts it out of the power of the proprietors of land to
contribute so largely towards the defence of the state as they
otherwise might be able to do. The rent of land, however, is,
according to some, the sole fund; and, according to others, the
principal fund, from which, in all great monarchies, the
exigencies of the state must be ultimately supplied. The more of
this fund that is given to the church, the less, it is evident,
can be spared to the state. It may be laid down as a certain
maxim, that all other things being supposed equal, the richer the
church, the poorer must necessarily be, either the sovereign on
the one hand, or the people on the other; and, in all cases, the
less able must the state be to defend itself. In several
protestant countries, particularly in all the protestant cantons
of Switzerland, the revenue which anciently belonged to the Roman
catholic church, the tithes and church lands, has been found a
fund sufficient, not only to afford competent salaries to the
established clergy, but to defray, with little or no addition,
all the other expenses of the state. The magistrates of the
powerful canton of Berne, in particular, have accumulated, out of
the savings from this fund, a very large sum, supposed to amount
to several millions; part or which is deposited in a public
treasure, and part is placed at interest in what are called the
public funds of the different indebted nations of Europe; chiefly
in those of France and Great Britain. What may be the amount of
the whole expense which the church, either of Berne, or of any
other protestant canton, costs the state, I do not pretend to
know. By a very exact account it appears, that, in 1755, the
whole revenue of the clergy of the church of Scotland, including
their glebe or church lands, and the rent of their manses or
dwelling-houses, estimated according to a reasonable valuation,
amounted only to 68,514:1:5 1/12d. This very moderate revenue
affords a decent subsistence to nine hundred and fortyfour
ministers.     The whole expense of the church, including what is
occasionally laid out for the building and reparation of
churches, and of the manses of ministers, cannot well be supposed
to exceed eighty or eighty-five thousand pounds a-year. The most
opulent church in Christendom does not maintain better the
uniformity of faith, the fervour of devotion, the spirit of
order, regularity, and austere morals, in the great body of the
people, than this very poorly endowed church of Scotland. All the
good effects, both civil and religious, which an established
church can be supposed to produce, are produced by it as
completely as by any other. The greater part of the protestant
churches of Switzerland, which, in general, are not better
endowed than the church of Scotland, produce those effects in a
still higher degree. In the greater part of the protestant
cantons. there is not a single person to be found. who does not
profess himself to be of the established church. If he professes
himself to be of any other, indeed, the law obliges him to leave
the canton. But so severe, or, rather, indeed, so oppressive a
law, could never have been executed in such free countries, had
not the diligence of the clergy beforehand converted to the
established church the whole body of the people, with the
exception of, perhaps, a few individuals only. In some parts of
Switzerland, accordingly, where, from the accidental union of a
protestant and Roman catholic country, the conversion has not
been so complete, both religions are not only tolerated, but
established by law.

The proper performance of every service seems to require, that
its pay or recompence should be, as exactly as possible,
proportioned to the nature of the service. If any service is very
much underpaid, it is very apt to suffer by the meanness and
incapacity of the greater part of those who are employed in it.
If it is very much overpaid, it is apt to suffer, perhaps still
more, by their negligence and idleness. A man of a large revenue,
whatever may be his profession, thinks he ought to live like
other men of large revenues; and to spend a great part of his
time in festivity, in vanity, and in dissipation. But in a
clergyman, this train of life not only consumes the time which
ought to be employed in the duties of his function, but in the
eyes of the common people, destroys almost entirely that sanctity
of character, which can alone enable him to perform those duties
with proper weight and authority.

PART IV.

Of the Expense of supporting the Dignity of the Sovereign.

Over and above the expenses necessary for enabling the sovereign
to perform his several duties, a certain expense is requisite for
the support of his dignity. This expense varies, both with the
different periods of improvement, and with the different forms of
government.

In an opulent and improved society, where all the different
orders of people are growing every day more expensive in their
houses, in their furniture, in their tables, in their dress, and
in their equipage; it cannot well be expected that the sovereign
should alone hold out against the fashion. He naturally,
therefore, or rather necessarily, becomes more expensive in all
those different articles too. His dignity even seems to require
that he should become so.

As, in point of dignity, a monarch is more raised above his
subjects than the chief magistrate of any republic is ever
supposed to be above his fellow-citizens ; so a greater expense
is necessary for supporting that higher dignity. We naturally
expect more splendour in the court of a king, than in the
mansion-house of a doge or burgo-master.

CONCLUSION.

The expense of defending the society, and that of supporting the
dignity of the chief magistrate, are both laid out for the
general benefit of the whole society. It is reasonable,
therefore, that they should be defrayed by the general
contribution of the whole society ; all the different members
contributing, as nearly as possible, in proportion to their
respective abilities.

The expense of the administration of justice, too, may no doubt
be considered as laid out for the benefit of the whole society.
There is no impropriety, therefore, in its being defrayed by the
general contribution of the whole society. The persons, however,
who give occasion to this expense, are those who, by their
injustice in one way or another, make it necessary to seek
redress or protection from the courts of justice. The persons,
again, most immediately benefited by this expense, are those whom
the courts of justice either restore to their rights, or maintain
in their rights. The expense of the administration of justice,
therefore, may very properly be defrayed by the particular
contribution of one or other, or both, of those two different
sets of persons, according as different occasions may require,
that is, by the fees of court. It cannot be necessary to have
recourse to the general contribution of the whole society, except
for the conviction of those criminals who have not themselves any
estate or fund sufficient for paying those fees.

Those local or provincial expenses, of which the benefit is local
or provincial (what is laid out, for example, upon the police of
a particular town or district), ought to be defrayed by a local
or provincial revenue, and ought to be no burden upon the general
revenue of the society. It is unjust that the whole society
should contribute towards an expense, of which the benefit is
confined to a part of the society.

The expense of maintaining good roads and communications is, no
doubt, beneficial to the whole society, and may, therefore,
without any injustice, be defrayed by the general contributions
of the whole society. This expense, however, is most immediately
and directly beneficial to those who travel or carry goods from
one place to another, and to those who consume such goods. The
turnpike tolls in England, and the duties called peages in other
countries, lay it altogether upon those two different sets of
people, and thereby discharge the general revenue of the society
from a very considerable burden.

The expense of the institutions for education and religious
instruction, is likewise, no doubt, beneficial to the whole
society, and may, therefore, without injustice, be defrayed by
the general contribution of the whole society. This expense,
however, might, perhaps, with equal propriety, and even with some
advantage, be defrayed altogether by those who receive the
immediate benefit of such education and instruction, or by the
voluntary contribution of those who think they have occasion for
either the one or the other.

When the institutions, or public works, which are beneficial to
the whole society, either cannot be maintained altogether, or are
not maintained altogether, by the contribution of such particular
members of the society as are most immediately benefited by them
; the deficiency must, in most cases, be made up by the general
contribution of the whole society. The general revenue of the
society, over and above defraying the expense of defending the
society, and of supporting the dignity of the chief magistrate,
must make up for the deficiency of many particular branches of
revenue. The sources of this general or public revenue, I shall
endeavour to explain in the following chapter.

