
LONG HAIR OF SAXONS AND DANES.

The human hair has ever been regarded as an ornament. The Anglo-Saxons
and Danes considered their hair as one of their greatest personal
beauties, and took great care to dress it to the utmost advantage. Young
ladies wore it loose, and flowing in ringlets over their shoulders; but
after marriage they cut it shorter, tied it up, and covered it with a
head-dress, according to the fashion of the times; but to have the hair
cut entirely off, was a disgrace of such a nature, that it was even
thought a punishment not inadequate to the crime of adultery; so great,
in the Middle ages, was the value set upon the hair by both sexes, that,
as a piece of the most peculiar mortification, it was ordered by the
canons of the church, that the clergy should keep their hair short, and
shave the crown of their head; and that they should not, upon any
pretence whatever, endeavor to keep the part so shaved from public view.
Many of the clergy of these times, finding themselves so peculiarly
mortified, and perhaps so easily distinguished from all other people by
this particularity, as to be readily detected when they committed any of
the follies or crimes to which human nature is in every situation
sometimes liable, endeavored to persuade mankind that long hair was
criminal, in order to reduce the whole to a similarity with themselves.
Amongst these, St. Wulstan eminently distinguished himself. "He rebuked,"
says William of Malmsbury, "the wicked of all ranks with great boldness,
but was _peculiarly_ severe upon those who were proud of their long
hair. When any of these vain people bowed their heads before him, to
receive his blessing, before he gave it he cut a lock from their hair,
with a sharp penknife, which he carried about him for that purpose; and
commanded them, by way of penance for their sins, to cut all the rest in
the same manner: if any of them refused to comply with his command he
reproached them for their effeminacy, and denounced the most dreadful
judgments against them. Such, however, was the value of their hair in
these days, that many rather submitted to his censures than part with
it; and such was the folly of the church, and of this saint in
particular, that the most solemn judgments were denounced against
multitudes, for no other crime than not making use of pen-knives and
scissors, to cut off an ornament bestowed by nature."


ST. VALENTINE'S DAY.

On St. Valentine's day, it is customary, in many parts of Italy, for an
unmarried lady to choose, from among the young gentlemen of her
acquaintance, one to be her guardian or gallant; who, in return for the
honor of this appointment, presents to her some nosegays, or other
trifles, and thereby obliges himself to attend her in the most
obsequious manner in all her parties of pleasure, and to all her public
amusements, for the space of one year, when he may retire, and the lady
may choose another in his place. But in the course of this connection it
frequently happens, that they contract such an inclination to each
other, as prompts them to be coupled for life. In the times of the
chivalry, we have seen that the men gloried in protecting the women, and
the women thought themselves safe and happy when they obtained that
protection. It is probable, therefore, that this custom, though now more
an affair of gallantry than of protection, is a relic of chivalry still
subsisting among that romantic and sentimental people.

But the observation of some peculiar customs on St. Valentine's day is
not confined to Italy; almost all Europe has joined in distinguishing it
by some particular ceremony. As it always happens about that time of the
year, when the genial influences of the spring begin to operate, it has
been believed by the vulgar, that upon it the birds invariably choose
their mates for the ensuing season. In imitation, therefore, of their
example, the vulgar of both sexes, in many parts of Britain, meet
together; and having upon slips of paper wrote down the names of all
their acquaintances, and put them into two different bags, the men drew
the female names by lot, and the women the male; the man makes the woman
who drew his name some trifling present, and in the rural gambol becomes
her partner; and she considers him as her sweetheart, till he is
otherwise disposed of, or till next Valentine's day provide her with
another.


COURTS OF LOVE.

In Spain, during the Middle Ages, courts of Love were established. These
courts were composed of ladies summoned to meet together, for the
purpose of discussing, in the most formal and serious manner, "beautiful
and subtle questions of love." They decided the precise amount of
inconstancy which a lady might forgive, without lowering her own
dignity, provided her lover made certain supplications, and performed
certain penances; they took it into solemn consideration whether a lover
was justified, under any circumstances, in expressing the slightest
doubt of his lady's fidelity; they laid down definite rules, and
ceremonials of behavior, to be observed by those who wished to be
beloved; and gravely discussed the question whether sentiment, or sight,
the heart, or the eyes, contributed most powerfully to inspire
affection.

