
CHAPTER IV

SYMPTOMATOLOGY


The data recorded in the preceding chapter suffice to show that the
activity of the sexual life begins in childhood, for the secondary
sexual characters and the other sexual peculiarities which manifest
themselves thus early in life are dependent upon sex. We shall now
proceed to the systematic description of the direct manifestations of
the sexual life, and we can most usefully begin with the genital organs.

Erections occur during childhood; they have been observed even in
infancy. They sometimes result from external stimuli, especially of a
pathological nature, such as a strictured prepuce, or inflammatory
states of the penis. Occasionally in the child, as normally in the adult
male, distension of the bladder with urine leads to erection of the
penis. Although in these cases the erection is not induced by sexual
processes, it is nevertheless not devoid of significance in relation to
the sexual life. The sensations in the genital organs to which the
pathological stimuli give rise are further increased by the erection,
and the child's attention is therefore increasingly drawn to his sexual
organs. His attention may, of course, be directed to his genital organs
by such stimuli as those we have described, even though these latter do
not lead to the occurrence of erection. By such sensations, the child is
very readily induced to manipulate his genital organs. Just as the
little child soon learns to scratch other itching regions of the skin,
so also he learns to scratch his genital organs when these are the seat
of an itching eruption, or when in any other way irritating sensations
arise in this region. Pflueger and Preyer[24] have made investigations
regarding the itching-reflex (_Kitzelreflexe_), and although in many
respects their results are divergent, yet one point is clearly
established by both, namely, that within a few months after birth a
distinct itching-reflex is in operation, inasmuch as the child
endeavours to scratch itching areas. Thus, by itching of the genital
organs, a child is readily led to practise masturbation; and this is not
necessarily effected by the hands, but sometimes by the feet, or by
rubbing the thighs against one another, this last being generally done
when the child is in the sitting posture. When erections occur in the
child, we cannot always trace them to external stimuli, for in many
cases they are due to stimuli of other kinds. Erection may, in fact,
result from internal stimuli, connected with the development of the
genital organs, and more especially that of the testicles. Moreover,
such developmental stimuli may induce the child to manipulate the
genital organs, and thus give rise to masturbation, without in the first
instance causing erection. It appears that such stimuli leading to the
practice of masturbation occur, during the first years of childhood,
chiefly, if not exclusively, in children with morbid hereditary
predisposition.

Such processes as these, viz., inflammatory stimuli originating in the
external genital organs, or developmental stimuli proceeding from the
testicles, may lead to the practice of masturbation without having
directly affected the child's consciousness. Just as in the pithed frog,
if we stimulate one foot with acetic acid, the other foot scratches the
irritated area, so a child may, with his hands or in some other way,
scratch itching regions of the body, and, above all, of the external
genital organs, without its being necessary for us to assume that he is
fully conscious of what he is doing. Further, as we have already pointed
out, such masturbation may or may not be preceded by a reflex erection.
And just as the boy soon learns that itching is relieved by scratching,
so also he learns that by means of artificial stimulation he may induce
sensations of a voluptuous character. It is the same with the little
girl, in whom sensations occur in the genital organs, due in some cases
to developmental, and in others to pathological stimuli (skin eruptions
are an instance of the latter kind), and these lead to manipulations of
the genital organs.

In contradistinction to the cases just described, in which the child
has learned spontaneously to practise artificial stimulation of his
genital organs, are the cases in which seduction by others is the cause
of masturbation. Nurses sometimes touch, stroke, and stimulate the
external genital organs of the children entrusted to their care--boys
and girls alike--either to keep them quiet, or for the gratification of
their own lustful feelings. In this way the child, who in the case of
all agreeable sensations has a natural desire for their repetition, is
gradually led to imitate the manipulations which have given rise to the
voluptuous sensations, and is thus seduced to the practice of
masturbation.

In the preceding passages I have spoken of all kinds of mechanical
stimulation of the genital organs, and also of erections[25] occurring
in small children. I now pass on to consider ejaculation. Whereas during
normal intercourse in the sexually mature man and woman a fluid
secretion is expelled, nothing of the kind is possible in children, at
least such is the general opinion. Frequently, indeed, as regards the
male sex, the end of childhood, properly speaking, is supposed to be
indicated by the first ejaculation of semen. Matters are, however, by no
means so simple as this. We have seen that the testicular secretion, the
most important constituent of the semen, consists, as Fuerbringer[26] has
pointed out, almost entirely of spermatozoa. But how is it in the case
of children? The spermatozoa may be first formed at very varying ages.
According to the investigations of Mantegazza,[27] they rarely make
their appearance earlier than the eighteenth year of life. Fuerbringer
does not unconditionally accept this view; but he has himself, as he has
personally informed me, examined boys at ages of fifteen to sixteen in
whom the ejaculation was entirely devoid of spermatozoa. But, on the
other hand, he has found spermatozoa in the semen of a boy aged only
twelve or thirteen years. I have myself examined the emissions of boys
in a considerable number of cases, and have repeatedly found that, even
in the case of boys of sixteen, the ejaculated secretions contained no
spermatozoa. The reports of other investigators also show that as
regards this point very wide individual variations occur. Hofmann[28]
has contributed some data to this discussion. A case published by Klose,
in which pregnancy is alleged to have resulted from intercourse with a
boy aged nine years, is, indeed, regarded by Hofmann as probably
apocryphal. But he had personal knowledge of a case in which a woman was
impregnated by a boy fourteen years of age. He assumes that when a boy's
general development is advanced (masculine habit of body, large penis,
&c.), his reproductive capacity will also make its appearance at an
earlier age. But he has met with exceptions to this generalisation.
Thus, in the post-mortem examination of the body of a boy aged fourteen,
whose physique was still quite infantile, he found well-developed
spermatozoa both in the testicles and in the seminal vesicles. In the
case of two boys aged fifteen years, in whom the genital organs were
powerfully developed, he found in one abundant spermatozoa, but in the
other none at all. In two other boys, also fifteen years of age, in whom
the pubic hair had not yet appeared, spermatozoa were present. They were
absent, again, in a young man of eighteen years. Similar variations were
found by Haberda. Thus, for example, in two boys aged fifteen and
seventeen years, respectively, he found no spermatozoa, notwithstanding
the fact that in both the pubic hair had grown. On the other hand, in a
boy aged 13-3/4 years, with an abundance of pubic hair, numerous
well-developed spermatozoa were present. Haberda is of opinion that,
speaking generally, the first formation of the spermatozoa is associated
with the appearance of the other indications of puberty. The earliest
authenticated age at which spermotozoa have been known to appear is
13-1/2 years; they have been found at this age by two separate
investigators, one in Paris, the other in Berlin. Notwithstanding the
fact that, as we have seen, such extensive variations occur, we are
justified in making the general statement that in the case of children
in our own country no spermatozoa are developed; if exceptions ever
occur, they can relate only to the last year or year and a half of the
second period of childhood.

We must now proceed to ask whether it is possible for ejaculation to
occur in children at a time of life when the formation of spermatozoa in
the testicles has not yet begun; this question must be answered with an
unconditional affirmative. We have seen that the secretions of several
other glands intermingle with the secretion of the testicles. These
glands are the following: the prostate gland, the glands of the vesiculae
seminales and the vasa deferentia, the glands of Cowper, and the glands
of Littre. It is certain that these glands begin to secrete at different
times, and, above all, that some of them begin to secrete before
spermatozoa have appeared in the testicles. Hence it is rightly believed
that the capacity for coitus (_potentia coeundi_) develops much earlier
than the capacity for procreation (_potentia generandi_)--a fact which
was well known to Zacchias.[29] _Quae enim hanc juventutem vel praecedunt
aetates, vel sequuntur aut plane semen non effundunt aut certe
infoecundum aut male foecundum effundunt._ Strassmann[30] considers
that in our climate the capacity for procreation begins at the earliest
at the end of the fifteenth year, and the capacity for coitus at the end
of the thirteenth year. In a number of cases in which in children I
found stains on the underclothing, or in some other way obtained
specimens of the ejaculated fluid, the results of the examination for
spermatozoa were entirely negative. In a case which came under my notice
a long time ago, that of a child seven years of age, I had assumed that
the fluid with which the underclothing was stained was produced by
inflammatory irritation of the urethra consequent upon masturbation.
Subsequent experience, however, in conjunction with the observations of
other investigators, has led me to the firm conviction that even in our
climate we do not need to invoke the idea of such inflammatory
irritation of the urethra in order to account for the ejaculation of
fluid by children--at any rate when these are approaching the end of the
second period of childhood. In the case of twelve-year-old boys, I
believe that such ejaculations of fluid occur in quite a large number of
cases. One instance, which did not come under my own observation, but
was communicated to me by one of our best-known educationalists, relates
to a boy only ten years of age. This boy, endeavouring to climb over a
fence, repeatedly slipped back; while thus engaged, he experienced his
first seminal emission. In this way he then masturbated several
times.[31]

Let us now consider whence the ejaculated fluid can be derived prior to
the age at which it comes to contain spermatozoa. In the first place, it
is possible that the testicles themselves, before they begin to form the
spermatozoa, may yet furnish an indifferent secretion, although in the
adult the secretion of the testicles consists chiefly of the
spermatozoa. We have also to consider the glands previously enumerated,
whose secretions normally form constituents of the semen. We possess,
however, hardly any trustworthy information regarding the time at which
the glands of the vasa deferentia begin to secrete. The glands of
Cowper, as Henle[32] showed many years ago, begin to secrete within a
few weeks after birth. He believed that these glands secreted
continuously, but that the secretion was retained for a time in the
ducts, and was discharged intermittently with the urine. For this reason
he believed that the glands of Cowper did not form a part of the
reproductive system. Subsequent investigations, however, have led us to
believe that the secretion of Cowper's glands is one of the constituents
of the semen. Another constituent is the secretion of the glands of
Littre, and these glands also perhaps begin to secrete at a much earlier
age than the testicles. We may regard it as certain that the seminal
vesicles may contain secretion before any spermatozoa are formed in the
testicles. As regards the prostate gland, it is supposed that this
first begins to secrete at the commencement of the age of puberal
development or even later. According to the data collected by Frisch,
the prostate gland, comparatively small in childhood, first begins to
grow quickly at the epoch of the puberal development. During childhood,
the gland tissue is comparatively scanty, although it already contains
concretions. Only during the puberal development does the prostate gland
attain its full size; according to the researches of Englisch, who
observed 1282 instances, this does not occur until after the full
development of the testicles. Beyond question we are justified, from the
information at our disposal, in concluding that the prostate gland
begins to secrete comparatively late. But, on the other hand, it is
equally clear that certain glands whose secretion in the adult forms
part of the semen, begin to secrete long before any spermatozoa have
been formed in the testicles, and may in this way give rise to the
formation of a semen incapable of fertilising the ovum.

In respect of the extrusion of the fluid, we have to recognise two
different ways in which this is effected: first, ejaculation, due to a
rhythmical expulsive movement; and secondly, the _urethrorrhoea ex
libidine_ met with in adults, of which an account was given in the
second chapter (p. 22). In my own investigations on the subject, I have
been able to learn nothing regarding the occurrence in children of any
_urethrorrhoea ex libidine_; and my information relates only to the
true ejaculation of a fluid, I have seen a few cases in which such
ejaculation occurred in boys at the early age of twelve years, although
this is quite exceptional, and, as already mentioned, in such cases the
ejaculated fluid contains no spermatozoa.

In the case of women, what has been said of the glands of Cowper applies
equally to the glands of Bartholin, the homologues of the former both as
regards significance and development. The glands of Bartholin also begin
to secrete in sexually immature girls, and even in children. It must be
added that when ejaculation occurs in sexually immature girls, the
products of other glands are probably intermingled with the secretion of
the glands of Bartholin (mucous glands of the uterus, of the cervix
uteri, the vagina, the vulva, and perhaps also of the urethra).

I have distinguished the simple outflow of secretion from its forcible
expulsion--from true ejaculation. This latter demands the rhythmical
activity of certain muscles, such as takes place during coitus. The
question arises, whether such muscular activity can occur before any
fluid has been formed capable of being ejaculated. When I compare what
is published in the literature of the subject with what I have myself
observed in this connexion, I regard the following points as definitely
established. There are certain cases, and these in young persons of both
sexes, in which typical rhythmical muscular contractions take place in
the child, although no ejaculated fluid is discoverable. It remains
doubtful, however, whether a small quantity of secretion, overlooked by
the observer, and perhaps not even recognisable, may not, after all, be
ejaculated. I consider it probable that this is so. Moreover, we must
not forget that the rhythmical muscular contractions, which in the adult
effect ejaculation, are able to expel the fluid from the urethra only
when this fluid is present in sufficient quantity. When the quantity is
minimal the fluid is retained for a time in that passage, owing to the
frictional resistance of the urethra, and is perhaps not expelled until
the next act of micturition. Some may, of course, object to denote such
a process by the word ejaculation; but I myself see no reason why the
term should not be extended to include the rhythmical muscular
contraction both in the child and the adult, even in cases in which
there is not sufficient fluid secretion in the urethra for this to be
visibly extruded by these contractions.

What have we to say regarding the voluptuous sensation in children? It
is extremely difficult to form clear ideas about this matter, for the
sources of fallacy previously described (p. 5 _et seq._) are here
markedly in operation; above all, in the case of little children, the
voluptuous sensation, purely subjective in character, is extraordinarily
difficult to recognise objectively. This much, however, may be said. It
appears to me to be beyond question that in childhood, and even in very
early childhood, a sensation may sometimes be excited of the same kind
as the voluptuous sensation of adult life. None the less, we must be
careful not to assume too readily, in any particular case, that such a
sensation has actually been experienced. Certain oscillatory movements
on the part of infants and other small children have frequently been
regarded as an indication of the practice of masturbation, and of the
occurrence of voluptuous sensations; but in my opinion that view is to a
large extent erroneous. Such movements may be no more than the
expression of a general sense of well-being, without having anything
whatever to do with the sexual life or with the specific voluptuous
sensation. Doubtless the voluptuous sensation may be experienced by very
small children, and even by infants. When we see a child lying with
moist, widely-opened eyes, and exhibiting all the other signs of sexual
excitement, such as we are accustomed to observe in adults, we are
justified in assuming that the child is experiencing a voluptuous
sensation. But what is usually wanting in such cases, at any rate in
young children, is the voluptuous acme which in adults occurs in
association with the act of ejaculation. Cases have also been
occasionally reported to me in which, even in infancy, a voluptuous acme
has occurred; and still more frequently I have been told this in respect
of somewhat older children, for example, at ages of seven or eight
years. I believe, however, that this voluptuous acme is, at any rate in
children, much less common than the equable voluptuous sensation which
can be aroused by all kinds of manipulations and stimulations of the
peripheral genital organs, and more especially of the glans, the penis,
the clitoris, and the labia minora. The older the child, the more
frequently is the voluptuous acme attained; in our own climate, during
the last years of the second period of childhood, this occurs
comparatively often; the voluptuous acme does not last so long as in
sexually mature individuals, but is in other respects described in
identical terms. It is experienced simultaneously with the occurrence of
the rhythmical muscular contractions which have previously been
described. It is possible, as I suggested before, that in such cases the
ejaculation of a certain quantity of glandular secretion always occurs,
although, as I have also explained, this secretion may sometimes be too
small in quantity to be actually expelled from the urethra by the
muscular extractions. This point is, however, still obscure. But it may
be regarded as definitely established that the equable voluptuous
sensation, and more particularly the voluptuous acme, may occur at an
age at which, at any rate, secretion does not yet exist in sufficient
quantity to be expelled from the urethra, and the existence of such
secretion is therefore not unequivocally manifested. In exceptional, and
doubtless pathological instances, and above all in cases in which, owing
to the practice of masturbation, there has been excessive stimulation,
instead of the voluptuous acme, a painful sensation may be experienced.
In general, however, in children, just as in adults, the voluptuous acme
is associated with a sense of satisfaction, and with the subsidence of
the previously existing sexual excitement. _This much is beyond
question, that the voluptuous acme and the sense of satisfaction
associated therewith make their appearance subsequent to the development
of erection and the equable voluptuous sensation in the genital organs._
Mutatis mutandis, _this is equally true of both sexes_.

In other respects, however, the voluptuous sensation and the voluptuous
acme exhibit in the child an important difference from the same
phenomena in the adult, to which we shall have to return later. To sum
up, we may regard it as certain that erections often appear many years
before the end of the second period of childhood; not infrequently,
indeed, in the beginning of the second period of childhood, and even
earlier. These erections may very early in life be associated with an
equable voluptuous sensation, allied to the sensations of itching or
tickling.[33] The voluptuous acme and ejaculation do not make their
appearance until later. These statements apply, in the first place, to
boys. The conditions in girls appear, however, to be analogous. But here
we must be most cautious in drawing conclusions, for the reason that the
sexual life of the girl is still much more obscure to us than that of
the boy; this difference in our knowledge of the sexes is no less marked
in the case of children than it is in respect of the adult man and
woman.

Hitherto we have occupied ourselves with the description of the
peripheral sexual organs, and of the processes of detumescence. We must
now pass on to the second group of sexual phenomena, the processes of
contrectation. Even in childhood, these processes play an important
part; indeed, they generally manifest themselves at an earlier age than
the processes of detumescence. But first, let me briefly summarise Max
Dessoir's account of the stages of the sexual impulse--stages in which
the contrectation impulse is alone concerned. In its development, three
stages may be distinguished. One of these is the neutral stage, in
earliest childhood, in which, speaking generally, the processes of
contrectation are not yet to be observed, and during which the child
does not feel attracted towards anyone in such a manner as to make it
necessary for us to assume the occurrence of any psychosexual process.
This stage is succeeded by the extremely important undifferentiated
stage, to which Max Dessoir[34] has drawn attention. Its principal
characteristic is indicated in its name: the direction of the impulse is
not yet completely differentiated. It oscillates to and fro, and depends
upon the external objects which happen to be in the vicinity. This
undifferentiated stage is of profound importance; and owing to the fact
that its existence has been ignored in the study of sexual perversions,
great confusion has arisen. During the undifferentiated period, it may
happen that quite normal children exhibit homosexual excitement, whose
importance is apt to be greatly over-estimated by their relatives and
others. During the undifferentiated stage a boy may love one of his
teachers or one of his friends, and yet in later life be perfectly
normal; many a woman, again, who loves her husband ardently has earlier,
during the undifferentiated period, passionately loved a school-fellow
or a governess. On the other hand, during the undifferentiated stage a
boy may exhibit an inclination towards someone of the opposite sex, the
governess or the girl-friend of his sister, for instance; conversely,
the girl may be attracted by a boy or a young man. This inclination,
whether homosexual or heterosexual, often leads to bodily acts, to
contact with the beloved person, embraces, and kisses, without the
necessary occurrence of any manifestations on the part of the external
genital organs, although such manifestations may at times ensue. The
undifferentiated stage is followed by the third stage, in which the
contrectation impulse becomes differentiated, so that in normal
individuals the sexual impulse becomes unmistakably heterosexual.
Normally, this differentiated stage endures until the time of the final
extinction of the sexual impulse.

I do not believe that an undifferentiated stage occurs in every one
without exception. On the other hand, I have absolutely no doubt that it
occurs very frequently indeed--far more frequently than is commonly
believed--and that it occurs in persons whose subsequent sexual
development is perfectly normal. Moreover, during the undifferentiated
stage, in addition to heterosexual and homosexual inclinations, perverse
sentiments may make their appearance. Masochistic, sadistic, fetichistic
excitations of all kinds are met with, and sexual inclination towards
animals is by no means rare. As regards the last named, the inclination
is directed especially towards the animals with which the child is most
intimately associated, as, for instance, a dog, a cat, a bird, a horse,
and the like. Again, during the period of undifferentiated sexual
impulse all kinds of disordered ideas may become associated with that
impulse; for instance, an impulse may arise to touch the saliva, or some
other excretory product, of the beloved being, human or animal, as the
case may be, and even to take such a product into the mouth. Many
persons completely forget all these manifestations of the
undifferentiated sexual impulse which have formed part of their own
early experiences. The causes of such oblivion have been discussed in
the first chapter (p. 5).

Yet another reason may be mentioned for regarding a knowledge of the
undifferentiated stage of the sexual impulse as of great importance. In
works on the pathology of the sexual impulse we are frequently assured
that in this or that specific instance the perversion was inborn,
because perverse sensations have existed since the days of childhood.
But the existence of the undifferentiated stage teaches us that we are
not justified in inferring, from the mere fact of the primary occurrence
of a "perverse" mode of sexual sensibility, that this perversion is
congenital; for the primary direction of the contrectation impulse
during the undifferentiated stage often depends to a considerably
greater extent upon chance than upon an inherited predisposition.

The undifferentiated stage begins at very various ages. I have known
instances in which it could be traced back to the fifth, year of life. I
regard it as probable, however, that it may begin even earlier than
this. But more commonly it begins somewhat later; not infrequently at
the age of seven or eight, and very often at the age of nine or ten
years. As previously mentioned, I do not maintain that an
undifferentiated stage is of universal occurrence. When such a stage is
absent, the symptoms of the differentiated sexual impulse often make
their appearance at the age at which in other cases the undifferentiated
stage of the impulse usually begins. In the case of a large number of
men, inquiry will show that at the age of nine or ten they began to
experience an inclination towards persons of the female sex; in a good
many this occurs even at the age of eight, and in a few yet earlier; as
regards women, _mutatis mutandis_, the same conditions obtain. In cases
in which an undifferentiated stage is well marked, its duration is
likewise very variable. In isolated instances it lasts until the age of
twenty, or even a few years longer. Ordinarily, however, the
differentiation of the impulse becomes manifest at an earlier
age--between the ages of fifteen and seventeen years. Beyond question,
in the great majority of cases, the "perverse" sentiments of childhood
subsequently disappear spontaneously. But when I come to discuss sexual
perversions in detail, I shall point out that this disappearance, in
certain circumstances, fails to occur.

I take this opportunity of referring to a beautiful example of the
undifferentiated sexual impulse which is found in _Wilhelm Meisters
Wanderjahren_. In the twelfth chapter of the second book, Wilhelm
describes "one of the earliest incidents of his youth":--"The elder of
these boys, a year or two my own senior, the son of the fisherman,
seemed to take no pleasure in this sport with flowers. This boy, by whom
at his first appearance I had been greatly attracted, invited me to go
with him to the river, a fairly wide stream which flowed past at a
little distance. We sat side by side in a shady spot with our
fishing-rods.... As we sat there quietly, leaning towards one another,
he seemed to grow rather weary of our inaction, and he drew my attention
to a flat stretch of gravel which extended from our feet beneath the
surface of the water. This would be a fine place to bathe. At last,
jumping to his feet, he cried out that the chance was too good to be
missed, and almost before I realised his intention, he had stripped, and
was in the water. Being a good swimmer, he soon left the shallows, swam
across the stream, and then back again into the deep water near the bank
on which I was sitting. My own mood was a strange one. Grasshoppers
danced round about me, ants crawled to and fro, many-coloured beetles
hung from the twigs, and brilliant dragon flies hovered in the air; my
companion caught sight of a great crayfish, flashing merrily out from
its hole beneath the roots overhanging the water, and cleverly eluding
an attempt to seize it by darting back into its lair. The air was so
warm and moist; in the sunshine one longed for the shade, and even in
the coolness of the shade one longed for the still greater coolness of
the water. Thus it was easy for him to entice me into the stream; his
invitation, once or twice repeated, proved irresistible, notwithstanding
my fear of a scolding from my parents, mingled with some dread of the
unknown element. Soon I undressed upon the gravelly bank, and ventured
gently into the water, not too far down the gradually shelving bank;
here he let me wait awhile, swimming out himself across the stream; then
he returned to my side, and as he left the water, standing upright, to
dry himself in the bright sunshine, it seemed to me that my eyes must be
dazzled by the power of the sun, so blindingly beautiful was the human
form--far more beautiful than I had ever before imagined. He seemed to
look at me with equal attention. Dressing quickly, we stood beside each
other with all barriers broken down, our spirits were drawn closely
together, and with ardent kisses we swore eternal friendship."

Groos rightly sees in this passage a delicate intimation of sexual
sensibility. A little later we read how Wilhelm, having made an
appointment with this boy to meet him one evening in the forest,
encounters a young girl, a little younger than himself. "Spring flowers
of all kinds were growing in the beautifully adorned fields, among the
grass, and along the hedges. My companion was beautiful, blond, gentle;
we walked trustingly side by side, each holding the other by the hand,
and seeming to wish for nothing better in the world.... When, after the
lapse of so many years, I look back upon my former state, it seems to me
to have been a truly enviable one. Unexpectedly, in the same instant, I
experienced the sentiments of friendship and of love; for as I
unwillingly took leave of the beautiful child, I was consoled by the
thought of explaining these ideas to my young boy-friend, by the
prospect of confiding in him, and of rejoicing in his participation in
these newly discovered sentiments."

The following description of the period of the undifferentiated sexual
impulse has been placed at my disposal:--

CASE 1.--X. is now thirty-four years of age, happily married, with
several healthy children. He is himself a thoroughly healthy man, with
normal impulses, and free from all bodily and mental abnormality. His
description of the period of the undifferentiated sexual impulse may
best be given in his own words. "At the age of nine, when I was still
living in the country, and was being educated by a private tutor, a
passionate affection for him took possession of me. Generally speaking,
he was good-natured and indulgent, but was at times strict, I used my
utmost endeavours to be near him as much as possible. I was happy when
he touched me. Gradually this inclination increased; everything that he
had touched, everything that he had warmed with his body, I also wished
to touch. If he had drunk from a glass, I secretly drank from it myself,
so that my lips might touch the very spot where his had rested. At the
age of ten I began to attend the public school in the town, I sat beside
a fellow-pupil who, like myself, came from the country. Soon I conceived
a fondness for him. He was not only my playmate, I wished always that we
should do our work together; whenever he had any other companion than
myself, I was profoundly unhappy. Was this jealousy? I believe it was.
When he left the school--it must have been about a year after I had
entered--I was at first very unhappy, but my fondness for him was soon
replaced by a passion for his sister, a girl about twelve years of age.
I had made her acquaintance through so often working with her brother,
and through visiting his parents' house. She was a pretty girl. At
first, after my friend had departed, I went to the house occasionally,
in order to hear some news of him, and of his doings in the school
abroad to which he had been sent. In the house that had been his home I
had also an indefinite feeling that I was near him once again. But
gradually my liking for his sister grew, and I was glad that her parents
gave me renewed invitations to the house, especially for the Sundays. To
be with this girl, to play with her, were to me an enduring source of
delight; and I remember that at this time I even developed a taste for
girlish amusements, which had hitherto been very disagreeable to me, and
for which later also my antipathy returned. Simultaneously with this
fondness for the girl, when I myself was about twelve years old I was
attracted by one of the schoolmasters, a man who ruled his classes very
strictly. My sentiments for this master were of exactly the same
character as those with which my tutor had formerly inspired me, but the
conditions of our intercourse were different, for I could see him only
in school, and on very rare occasions out of school hours, whereas in
the case of my tutor, who lived with us when I was at home, I could be
with him as much as I desired. This fondness for my schoolmaster
persisted simultaneously with the passion for the girl. When her brother
came home for the holidays, I saw him for a few days only, for I also
returned home for the holidays. Although I was by no means indifferent
to him, my former passionate affection for him had entirely disappeared.
My passion for his sister and for the schoolmaster lasted for a long
time. I also fell in love with a somewhat elderly female cousin who
chanced to visit our house. Growing older, I at length attained the age
of puberty, and experienced definite erections; these occurred
especially when I thought of my friend's sister; or when she touched me,
as occasionally happened, without, I believe, any sexual feeling on her
part. At this time also when erections had already begun, I still felt
definitely attracted by my schoolmaster, and under the influence of this
attraction erections occasionally occurred. Somewhat later came the time
when I began to masturbate. I can no longer remember with certainty
whether I was seduced to this practice by any of my school-fellows. We
sometimes talked to one another about the matter. I continued at times
to be influenced by the inclinations previously mentioned, viz., that
for my schoolmaster, and that for my friend's sister. I experienced also
transient passion for one of my school-fellows, who was remarkable for
his pleasing and delicately girlish exterior. It was not until several
years had elapsed, and the occurrence of seminal emissions had shown
that I had attained some degree of sexual maturity, that all inclination
towards the male sex disappeared, and the inclination towards the female
sex persisted in isolation. When I left the town, in order to attend a
different school, my fondness for my friend's sister passed away. I was
then sixteen years of age; from this time onwards my sexual passion was
exhibited exclusively towards members of the female sex."

CASE 2.--This case provides us with another description of the
undifferentiated sexual impulse. X. is thirty years of age. No morbid
condition is demonstrable in him. He remembers that the first sentiments
which he regards as sexual were experienced by him in the country. His
home was in a town, but during the holidays he was sent to board in the
country, in the house of a clergyman. He played much in the open air,
and he still recalls quite distinctly the passion with which, first of
all, he approached animals. "As if by an irresistible impulse I was
attracted, now by a goat, now by a dog, sometimes even by a horse. No
excitement of the genital organs was noticeable at this time, but I have
no doubt whatever now that these inclinations were sexual in their
nature. Not only did I touch the animals, but I embraced them and kissed
them. The warmth and the odour proceeding from such an animal, which is
now as a rule distasteful to me, was then a source of pleasure. When I
left the country, I took these memories away with me, but gradually they
faded and became faint. Next a fondness for one of my school-fellows
became most marked, and this lasted for a long time. I know not how to
describe the feeling I had for him otherwise than as an immeasurable,
passionate love. I was unhappy when I sat above him in the class.
Occasionally we sat side by side, but not always, since our places were
determined by our performances in class. If I was sitting next above
him, it was a joy to me to fail deliberately to answer a question,
simply in order to enable him to take my place, and thus to give him
pleasure. This relationship continued undisturbed for several years; we
rose together from class to class and remained friends. Not until the
beginning of the true puberal development did this fondness begin to
wane. I began to learn dancing rather early, and in the dancing-class
was a girl by whom I was now greatly attracted. She was of the same age
as myself--fourteen years. As far as I can remember, my inclinations
were now confined for a time to my boy companion and to this girl. At
first my affection for the boy was the greater, but gradually my
affection for the girl, who was healthy and vivacious in appearance,
became stronger. Still, this passion was a fire of straw, for though, in
the course of the next few years, my fondness for the boy gradually
declined, whilst my affection for the girl grew stronger, yet later this
girl was expelled from my circle of interests by others, my inclinations
changing rapidly from one girl to another. Homosexual sentiments hardly
existed any more. Very occasionally, indeed, even up to my twentieth
year, a certain interest was aroused in me by any youth with a truly
girlish, milk-white countenance. But subsequently this homosexual
inclination disappeared entirely, and my heterosexual development was
completed, so that I am now, I believe, in every respect a healthy
male."

CASE 3.--Next we have the case of a woman, now married and twenty-six
years of age, in whom also the undifferentiated sexual impulse was
clearly manifested. From the age of eight to the age of fifteen years
she attended a day-school for girls, and subsequently, after receiving
private tuition for a time, went to a boarding-school. "In my earlier
years I can recall no feelings for my school-fellows beyond those of
simple friendship. We kissed one another, but no more intimate contact
took place. In these kisses, I was not aware of any sentiment exceeding
pure friendship; and to-day when I thoroughly understand the nature of
the kiss of erotic love, I do not believe that there was any erotic
element intermingled with these first kisses. Such simple friendliness
towards my fellow-schoolgirls persisted unaltered even after in my tenth
year I first experienced a sentiment of enthusiastic devotion. This
latter was inspired by an actress, a remarkably beautiful woman visiting
our town--I lived then in a town of medium size--whose pictures were
displayed in all the shop windows. Although I realised later that her
talents were by no means of a high order, and notwithstanding the fact
that I never saw her on the stage, I conceived for her an enthusiastic
admiration. I tried from time to time, when I could do so without being
observed, to catch a glimpse of her in the street; almost the only
possible opportunity was when she was on her way to rehearsals. When the
actress went away, her place in my heart was occupied by a schoolmaster
of typically masculine appearance, with a full, fair beard. He gave us
lessons in history, literature, and German. Nearly all the class were
fascinated by him, and I by no means less than the others. This
admiration lasted almost the whole of the remaining time during which I
attended the school. When I went to the boarding-school, being now
somewhat older, and regarded as almost a young woman, I was allowed to
witness a representation of Faust. The part of Gretchen was played by an
actress who is still of note to-day, and she made a most enduring
impression on me. To my great delight I was unexpectedly presented to
her, and she wrote a line or two in my album. Unfortunately, the
headmistress would not allow us to go often to the theatre, a
prohibition doubtless in part dependent on the high prices of the seats.
But I still remember quite distinctly how I trembled with joy whenever I
was allowed to go. I remember, too, that on one occasion, in which it
had been arranged that I was to go to see a play in which this actress
did not appear, I shammed illness in order to save up the price of the
seat, go that I might use it on another occasion, on which I should be
able to see her. This particular enthusiasm lasted as long as I
remained at the boarding-school. When later I grew old enough to marry,
and when with the approval of my parents a gentleman who appeared to
love me (though, in fact, I think he was influenced rather by prudential
motives) began to pay me his addresses, my fondness for the actress soon
began to fade away. Even at the present day, however, I esteem this
artiste very highly indeed, and the impression which she made on my
imagination will never be entirely expunged from my memory. If I were to
see her to-day, I should willingly kiss her hands, in thankfulness for
the happy hours she has given me; but I do not believe that any erotic
element now remains in my feeling for her. I may add that I do not love
my husband passionately, although I love him well enough. Physical
contact with the actress of whom I have spoken would not be positively
repulsive to me, but such contact would, as far as I am concerned, be
entirely devoid of sexual feeling, and the idea of sexual contact with a
person of my own sex is very unpleasant to me; whereas in sexual
intercourse with my husband I am perfectly normal." This patient does
not belong to the class of sexually anaesthetic women; she feels the
impulse towards sexual intercourse, and in intercourse she experiences
normal enjoyment.

I shall now discuss some of the general phenomena of the contrectation
impulse in the child. Sanford Bell has published cases in which as early
as the age of two years psychosexual phenomena have been observed. But
in many of Bell's cases a sexual basis for the feelings of attraction
does not appear to have been adequately proved to exist. Unquestionably,
however, sexual phenomena are more frequently observed in proportion as
the child's age increases. Although in the case of children it is very
difficult for others to arrive at certainty regarding the sexual or
non-sexual character of certain manifestations, still, in the eighth
year of life, the phenomena of the contrectation impulse become so
frequent--I am referring here to personal observations--that at this
time of life these phenomena must be regarded, not merely as not
pathological, but further, as not even abnormal. The older the child
becomes, the more are the phenomena of the contrectation impulse
complicated by those of detumescence. The processes of contrectation,
however, may continue to manifest themselves during the first years of
the period of youth in complete isolation from any apparent changes in
the genital organs. The manifestations of what is known as "calf-love"
commonly occur quite independently of any thought of sexual contact.

Very various are the objects of this early attraction. Often a boy is
attracted by a girl of about his own age; often, again, by a girl
considerably older than himself. On the other hand, as has been
previously shown, when the sexual attraction felt by the boy is
exhibited towards one of his own sex, it may sometimes happen that the
object of attraction is a boy of his own age, sometimes a man
considerably older than himself. By no means rare are sexual
inclinations on the part of boys towards their masters--in some cases a
private tutor; in others, a schoolmaster. With girls similar variations
are observed. A girl may love another girl of her own age, and this is
extremely common in the case of girls at boarding-schools. But a boy, a
friend of her brother's, may be the object of a girl's affection.
Frequently, again, a girl may become attached to some one considerably
older than herself, commonly a master or a governess. Persons playing
some conspicuous part in life very readily inspire love: an artist, for
instance; or an actress, about whom all the papers are writing, and of
whom everyone is talking. In many cases, the personal appearance plays a
considerable part in originating the attraction. At times, indeed,
affection is inspired by individuals devoid of all personal charm. But,
speaking generally, we shall find that to the child, no less than to the
adult, in sexual relationships beauty is by no means indifferent. A
pretty girl is more attractive to a boy than an ugly one. A handsome
master will charm a girl much more than one who is ill-favoured or
deformed. Other qualities besides beauty affect the issue. Effeminate
boys or tomboyish girls are apt to be repulsive to other children; they
are exposed to mockery and teasing of all kinds, and are very unlikely
to give rise to erotic sentiments in their companions. It is by no means
rare for the inclinations of children to be directed towards their own
parents. In the case of many children who are fond of "getting into
mother's bed," sexual sentiments lie at the root of the desire.
Moreover, it is occasionally asserted that sexual differentiation
manifests itself in this connexion in very early childhood, the little
boy preferring to cuddle his mother; the little girl, on the other hand,
to be caressed by her father. In the chapter on diagnosis, I shall
consider the distinction of such sexual inclinations from other
sympathetic feelings manifested in childhood. It is a remarkable fact
that the first sexual inclinations are very rarely directed towards a
child's own brother or sister. I have, indeed, been able to observe a
considerable number of such exceptional instances, both homosexual and
heterosexual in character. But, I repeat, such cases are comparatively
rare. We must not, of course, confuse with genuine sexual inclinations
and acts, cases in which from curiosity alone brothers and sisters
indulge together in obscene conversation and even improper practices.
Unquestionably, the lack of sexual sympathy between brothers and sisters
depends upon a deeply rooted psychological causation. Above all, in this
connexion, we have to bear in mind the slight degree of influence each
exercises on the senses of the other, precisely in consequence of the
long-continued, comparatively unrestrained intercourse between them.
Further, the conventional factors implanted in mankind from earliest
childhood play their part. Many, perhaps, will see an additional cause
in teleological considerations, aiming at the avoidance of in-and-in
breeding.

Many lovers incline to the romantic transfiguration of the object of
their affection, a process in which the imagination plays an important
part; but for this to be possible, it is, of course, necessary that an
age should have been attained at which the imagination is sufficiently
active. The age at which the child has learned to delight in fairy-tales
is here of importance; from the contents of such fairy-tales all kinds
of ideas are transferred to the sexual sphere. Romantic embellishment
plays a great part not merely in childhood, but also later in life; but
in childhood, this tendency often exists to an extraordinary degree. The
person whom a boy loves must be very highly placed; for example, during
the period of the undifferentiated sexual impulse, he prefers a boy of
the highest possible birth. Similarly, a young girl who loves a boy will
invest him in imagination with every possible attribute of distinction
and high rank. Often the love is directed towards a person of no
concrete existence, or towards one who is unattainable.[35] We may
sometimes be in doubt whether we have to do with sexual love, or whether
some other sentiment may not be in operation. For example, the devotion
to some saint of either sex may overpower all other feelings. Where a
child is enamoured of some definite individual, self-deception occurs
just as it does in adults similarly situated. The faults of the beloved
one are imaginatively transmuted into virtues, or any possible excuse is
found for them. Is a boy attracted by a girl known to be habitually
untruthful? Especially when himself unaware that his interest is sexual,
he looks out for every merit she may possibly possess, in order that his
fondness may be justified. Her untruthfulness is transfigured as caution
and cleverness; her vanity becomes neatness; idleness is excused on the
ground that she has to attend to more important duties; and the boy
regards his interest in the girl as exclusively friendly in character,
and as justified by her superlative excellences. Sometimes, in children
no less than in adults, a sexual inclination masquerades as an
educational interest. Thus, under the influence of sexual attraction, a
girl becomes intimate with a boy endowed with various bad qualities and
impulses, and endeavours to utilise this intimacy for the boy's
advantage, in order that he may free himself of his faults as he grows
to manhood. Such a girl may succeed in persuading herself that this
motive is the exclusive cause of her interest in the boy. A similar
combination of educational and sexual motives is, moreover, often
encountered in the case of homosexual sentiments.

The child's sexual inclination may manifest itself in many different
ways. It seeks every opportunity of seeing, of being in close proximity
to, of touching, and of kissing the beloved person. Thus, many a boy
takes part in the common sports, solely because the girl whom he loves
is one of the players. Sanford Bell mentions numerous games in which
children find pleasure chiefly for the reason that kissing plays a
principal part in them. For kissing is one of the leading manifestations
of sexual desire; and another is the wish for close proximity to and for
embracing the beloved person. A mother who kept a close watch on her
eight-year-old daughter told me that when in play a boy of ten pressed
close up against the girl; they kissed one another somewhat
passionately, and the boy broke out in the naive utterance, "You don't
know how fond I am of you; I do love you so." Not infrequently, indeed,
children are really troublesome to adults in their desire for close
physical contact. I have known instances in which young women or girls
have been intolerably annoyed by boys eight or nine years of age, who
have continually followed them about and pressed up against them; this
has gone on for a long time without those concerned recognising the
sexual foundation of such conduct. Love on the part of children almost
invariably gives rise to the desire for physical contact of some kind.
Of course, other manifestations also occur. Besides the contemplation of
the beloved person, contemplation of his or her picture plays a notable
part. A sexual motive occasionally underlies the wrestling so common
among boys--in such cases it is the manifestation of a desire for
intimate physical contact with the beloved boy. According to Sanford
Bell, a boy and a girl may also wrestle with one another with the same
end in view of attaining intimate contact; and he states that children
lift one another with the same object. Moreover, children are induced to
wrestle by sexual motives of a somewhat different character; the wish is
operative to be overcome by, or, it may be, to overcome, the beloved
boy. Herein we see displayed very clearly those sexual feelings known to
us in adults under the names of masochism and sadism; the same feelings
are occasionally observed also in childhood; in some cases as
manifestations of the undifferentiated sexual impulse, in others as
manifestations of developing sexual perversions.

The more intensely passionate the love of the child, the more
fantastical is its conduct. The child sometimes endeavours to imitate
the beloved person in every detail, often with the most ridiculous
results. A boy's mode of dress, even, may be influenced by his love for
a girl, and still more by his love for another boy. The child tries also
to imitate the movements of the beloved person, and in walking to tread
in the same footsteps. The youthful knight seeks in every possible way
to become pleasing to the girl of his choice, and to exhibit to her
every attention in his power. He does all this, not merely in imitation
of the conduct of grown-up persons, but for the gratification of his own
impulses. Sometimes we are able to observe the changes of mood that
occur in the child when the loved one is present or absent. The boy
bubbles over with joy when the girl he loves draws near; sorrow and
depression overwhelm him when the hour of parting is at hand. All kinds
of fetichistic sentiments are also met with even in childhood. Every
object belonging to the loved one is covered with passionate kisses; and
everything which has been touched by the beloved, has been endowed for
the child-lover with a quite exceptional value. "Those lovely girls whom
kindly or cruel Nature has predestined to awaken desire and to call
forth sighs at every footstep they take, are often unaware that among
the crowd of their admirers are numbered boys also, who have hardly
outgrown the age of childhood, who kiss in secret every flower which
their beloved has let fall, who are happy if they have been able to
steal like thieves into the room in which the fair one has slept, who
kiss the carpet where her foot has pressed, to whom she is the most
wonderful creature in the universe. And when a young woman allows a boy
to sit on the ground beside her, resting his head on her knee, when her
fingers play lightly among his curls, how rarely does she know that his
heart is beating furiously under her caressing touch; when he throws
back his curly head, and she sees that his face is reddened, she does
not know that this is not simply on account of the heat of the fire, but
that he is glowing from the effect of an internal fire whose nature is a
mystery even to himself--the fire of Love."[36]

Children have also ample experience of jealousy. A boy is tortured by
its pangs when he sees his much-loved friend conversing with another. A
girl of ten may suffer from sleepless nights when the governess she
loves has spoken affectionately to another girl. A child may wait for
hours before the door or in the neighbourhood of the beloved person,
simply to snatch a glance in passing. Speaking generally, it appears to
me that children are jealous of adults to a less extent than they are
jealous of children of their own age.

Very frequently even in childhood sexuality gives rise to enduring
imaginative sexual activity. There results that which Hufeland in his
_Makrobiotik_ terms psychical onanism, viz., the imaginative
contemplation of a train of lascivious and voluptuous ideas. In many
instances there even results a poetical treatment of the sexual topic.

Among children, love-letters also play their part. Sometimes, indeed,
their contents is so harmless that the sexual motive remains
unsuspected; but in other cases, the child's sentiments are clearly
displayed, even when the whole character of the letter is extremely
naive. Sometimes the letter appears out of harmony with the child's
conduct in other respects. For example, I have seen cases in which,
though in conversation children spoke to one another in an impassioned
manner as "darling" and "my dear love," no such expressions were used
by them in their letters. Verses are also composed by comparatively
youthful lovers. As we should expect, such verses are commonly deficient
in the matter of artistic technique. A lady who, when twelve years of
age, had been enamoured of her governess, copied for me from her album
the following verses:--


  "Es gibt nichts schoeneres auf der Welt,
   Als wenn einem ein Wesen besonders gefaellt;
   Und fuehlt man sich gezogen hin
   Zu einer suessen Lehrerin,
   Das ist ein Glueck.
   Und liebt man sie so inniglich,
   Dann fuerchtet wohl gar sehr man sich
   Vorm Abschiedtag..."

  "Of all things sweet beneath the sun,
   The sweetest is to love but one;
   And when the object of one's fondness
   Is one's darling governess,
   Supreme the joy.
   And if one love her so intensely,
   Then, of course, one dreads immensely
   The day of parting...."

In this style the poem continues for some time, and occasionally we come
to verses showing that jealousy was felt:--

  "O! Du Pauline sei kein Dieb,
   Raub' mir nicht Fraeulein ----'s Lieb'.
   Die Eifersucht, die quaelt mich sehr
   Und noch mit jedem Tage mehr.
   Sie sucht mich heim selbst in der Nacht.
   O Liebe, Du hast dies vollbracht."

  "Pauline, you my anger move,
   Stealing my Miss ----'s love.
   From jealousy I've no release;
   Day by day my pangs increase;
   I've jealous thoughts too in the night.
   Love, I suffer from thy might."

Many of the accompaniments of love may make their appearance the very
first time the passion awakens, such as the desire to please and to
astonish the object of affection, whether by mental or by bodily
excellence, A schoolmaster, of whom a child is enamoured, will
frequently find that this child is more obedient and more diligent than
all the others, the child endeavouring in every possible way to inspire
a reciprocal admiration. I remember a girl who during her first years at
school was extremely idle. Although by no means lacking in intelligence,
all the efforts spent on her failed to bring about a proper advance. All
at once she became most industrious; no task was too hard for her, and
everyone wondered at the sudden change, until after a time the enigma
was explained. The child, having conceived a great fondness for her
schoolmistress, wished to please the latter by attention to her lessons.
In addition, she was jealous; afraid lest the mistress should prefer
some other girl. In many instances, where a child's behaviour is
puzzling, such a solution of the riddle will become apparent when it is
looked for. Boys, again, endeavour by feats of strength to make the
greatest possible impression upon the girls of their choice, in
gymnastic exercises, for example, in athletic sports, and games.
Coquetry also occasionally manifests itself very early in life. Girls
try to please boys by their dress, and in similar ways. In boys also
similar phenomena may often be observed.

Vanity, too, plays an important part, and this all the more because a
child often wishes to appear older than his years, and despises childish
ways. If a boy loves a girl several years older than himself, his
sensitive pride will suffer if, as usually happens in such cases, the
girl treats him as a child. Goethe, who at the age of ten was inspired
by such a passion, describes it in _Wahrheit und Dichtung_. "Young
Derones introduced me to his sister, who was a few years older than
myself, a very agreeable girl, well-grown, regularly formed, a brunette,
with black hair and eyes. Her whole expression was quiet, and even sad.
I tried to please her in every possible way, but could not succeed in
attracting her attention. Young girls are apt to regard themselves as
greatly in advance of boys a little younger than themselves, and whilst
they look up to young men, they assume the manners of an aunt towards
any boy who makes them the object of his first love."

The sense of shame makes its appearance in childhood. Havelock Ellis
and others indeed deny this, pointing out how readily shyness is
mistaken for the sense of shame. The error is common enough, but it
certainly does not apply to all cases, for even in childhood we often
enough encounter distinct manifestations of the sexual sense of shame. I
shall not here discuss the question to what extent this sense is innate
and to what extent acquired, since the matter will come up for
consideration in later part of this book. Unquestionably, during
childhood, the sense of shame in respect of certain processes may be
awakened by means of imitation and education. Thus we may observe that
many children, boys as well as girls, are greatly distressed, at any
rate during the second period of childhood, at having to undress in the
presence of others, and especially in the presence of persons of the
opposite sex. It is interesting to learn that many homosexuals declare
that even during childhood they felt ashamed when they were compelled to
undress before someone of their own sex, whereas in the presence of a
person of the opposite sex they were comparatively unashamed.

Sanford Bell is of opinion that girl-children, although in them as in
boys the sense of shame awakens comparatively early, are yet more
aggressive than boys. I have not myself been able to observe any such
difference. In the earlier years of childhood I have been unable to
detect any notable difference in this respect between the sexes; but
during the latter part of the second period of childhood, boys are
unquestionably more active. In general, the girl-child, when in love,
displays far less coyness and reserve than the young woman. In this
respect the difference between children and adults is most marked. A
girl of eleven, for example, will not make any difficulties about the
exchange of love-letters with the boy she loves, or about appointments
for secret meetings; whereas the young woman, at any rate when
well-behaved and well brought up, is cautious in such matters. But none
the less, I cannot admit that girls are more free in their behaviour in
these respects than boys. We must not forget that many typical sexual
differences do not develop until later in life; for this reason, if we
observe in respect of the sense of shame that girls seem somewhat
defective, we must contrast their condition with that which will
subsequently develop as age advances, and not expect to find prematurely
in the girl a keener sense of shame than is exhibited by the boy.

Sanford Bell believes that at a certain period during childhood, namely,
between eight and twelve years of age, manifestations of love are less
noticeable than either earlier or later. He alleges as the reason of
this that at this particular age the child tends to conceal its fondness
from others, and perhaps even from the person beloved; hence it is
difficult during these years to observe the phenomena. According to this
view, the difference is apparent merely, and depends only upon greater
secretiveness. It may, indeed, be regarded as proved that in the course
of development, especially in the case of boys, there are certain years
during which children are less inclined to seek the company of those of
the opposite sex than either before or afterwards. This occurs
especially during the period of hobbledehoyhood, during which boys take
pleasure above all in rough sports. It has, indeed, been suggested that
this phenomenon has a teleological significance, that nature is here
pursuing a quite definite aim, to minimise by means of sexual antipathy
the danger attendant on the awakening of the sexual impulse. We must
not, however, over-value this self-help of the part of nature [if it
exists], since, if boys and girls avoid one another, the perverse
activities of the undifferentiated sexual impulse may very readily
appear in place of the suppressed heterosexual manifestations.

In the child, the moods of the amatory sentiment are exceedingly
variable. To-day, the love may be romantic in character; to-morrow, on
the other hand, rather sensual. To-day, a girl is enamoured of some
friend of her father's; to-morrow, she is in love with some little
friend of her brother's, or with one of her schoolmasters. A little
later, a member of her own sex becomes the object of passion, a
girl-friend of her own, or some actress of note. In general, especially,
too, when the stage of the undifferentiated impulse has not been
well-marked, we notice that as the years pass the inclination gradually
comes to relate to older persons. Since the period of childhood embraces
a comparatively small number of years, it is naturally not easy to
establish this point with mathematical precision; but I have been led to
form such an opinion by questioning a large number of persons of either
sex. In this respect we sometimes observe that which, in the _Satyricon_
of Petronius, Quartilla said long ago, when young Giton is united to the
seven-year-old Pannychis. In free phraseology, Quartilla assures us that
she has no remembrance of ever having been a virgin. "When I was a
child, I made use of children for this purpose; as I became older,
bigger boys served my turn; and thus, from stage to stage, I attained my
present age."

Thus we can explain how it sometimes happens that a fondness conceived
in childhood may endure on into adult life, and may even culminate in
marriage. In large towns, indeed, such an occurrence is comparatively
rare, but in small towns and in the country, quite a number of instances
have been brought to my notice. As children, the two have grown up
together. Their reciprocal fondness originated long prior to the
formation of any conscious sexual sentiments; subsequently, when such
sentiments have arisen, and the sexual impulse has awakened, it is
natural that sexual relations should often ensue. Since in the country
(in contrast with large towns, in which prostitution is commonly
rampant) premarital sexual intercourse is comparatively frequent, we can
readily understand that such a relationship as has been described will
often culminate in marriage, for in the country marriage is far less
often prevented by the occurrence of pre-marital intercourse than it is
in large towns.

On the whole, however, the amatory manifestations of childhood are of
brief duration. Separation at first gives rise to spiritual pain, but
this is as a rule soon forgotten; similarly when the beloved one is
snatched away by death, the child's grief is not enduring. Commonly such
painful emotions speedily pass away; and whether the parting is due to
death or to other causes, a new passion is apt shortly to replace the
old. In exceptional cases, however, the death of the beloved one, or
separation otherwise effected, may, even in the child lead to suicide or
to severe nervous disturbances.

Hitherto I have spoken of the processes of detumescence and
contrectation as isolated manifestations. As regards the relationships
between these respective processes, there are various possibilities. In
the first place, one may exist when the other is absent, that is to say,
the phenomena of detumescence or the phenomena of contrectation may
appear in isolation. Secondly, the two processes may be in complete
association each with the other. A boy of thirteen years feels the
impulse to draw near to a girl, and to kiss her; when this close contact
takes place, erection ensues. Of all the cases known to me, the earliest
age at which such a phenomenon occurred is given in a case published by
Fere.[37]

Two cousins, boy and girl, were playmates from the time they were both
about three years old. They played at being man and wife; and when they
were not actually together, the boy's imagination was occupied with the
subject. He thought continually about it, and when he was in bed at
night erection occurred, accompanied by an agreeable sensation. He went
to sleep, and dreamed that other persons got into bed with him and
touched him. Among these persons was the little girl, his cousin. Such
dreams recurred very frequently; the girl, moreover, was constantly in
his waking thoughts. As he grew older, his fondness persisted; but when
at the age of seventeen he made up his mind to tell his cousin of his
love for her, she became engaged to someone else. Consequently he
suffered from severe nervous shock.

In the third place, the two processes, contrectation and detumescence,
may occur simultaneously, without the detumescence being associated with
the object of the contrectation impulse. Thus cases occur in which boys
experience organic sensations in the genital organs leading them to
masturbate, and at the same time love someone; and yet when in the
company of, and even when embracing the beloved, such a boy will not
experience any specific sensations in the genital organs, nor will any
impulse arise towards sexual contact with the beloved person.

When the two processes are associated in such a manner that proximity
to the object of the contrectation impulse arouses the phenomena of
detumescence, sexual acts between the two persons are very likely to
result--provided, of course, that the affection is reciprocal. In this
way many of the sexual acts effected between children originate; and the
same is true of those in which children at times very readily lend
themselves to the gratification of the sexual passion of adults. We
learn from experience that in such cases attempts at actual intercourse
may be made by children, usually accompanied by erection, but in most
cases without ejaculation. I append a brief report of one case which
came under my own observation.

CASE 4.--X., twenty-one years of age, apparently sprung from a healthy
family, and at least free from hereditary taint, declares that his first
experience of sexual sensations occurred at the early age of five or six
years; at this age he became enamoured of a servant girl, who caressed
him very frequently, and pressed her genital organs against his body.
Later, when eight or nine years old, he fell in love with a girl of
about the same age, and made attempts at coitus. He remembers quite
distinctly that he then had erections, and also a kind of voluptuous
sensation, but no ejaculation. After continuing this practice for a
considerable time, he became aware, being very religiously brought up,
that he was behaving very wrongly. He therefore gave up all attempts at
sexual congress, and lived quite chastely until he attained the age of
nineteen. Throughout this time he neither masturbated, nor endeavoured
to effect coitus, nor practised any kind of sexual act. At the age of
nineteen, however, the sexual impulse becoming very powerful, he began
to masturbate, and has continued to do so up to the present time---
once, twice, thrice, or even four times weekly. Once he did not
masturbate for as long as three months, but this was the only prolonged
continent interval. He experiences a normal impulse towards members of
the other sex. Prostitutes are repulsive to him; he is attracted chiefly
by girls of exceptional intelligence. He feels quite certain that to
kiss and embrace such a girl would be very pleasurable to him, although
he is not aware of any definite impulse towards coitus. Masturbation
has always been practised by him as a purely physical act,
unaccompanied, that is to say, by any imaginative ideas.

In most cases, the complete association of the processes of detumescence
and contrectation, such as occurs in the impulse towards coitus, first
takes place at a somewhat later age. This is so even when the sensory
element, which constitutes a part also of the contrectation impulse, has
been already clearly manifested. The contrectation impulse does not
consist solely in this, that the boy experiences a purely spiritual love
for the girl; it may rather happen that certain definite sexual bodily
peculiarities in a woman attract him. When such a boy one day
unexpectedly sees a girl's breasts, this may exercise on him a powerful
stimulus. Similarly, I have known instances in which, in the absence of
any evidence of definite seduction, a woman's genital organs have
excited a very young boy, without arousing any idea in his mind of
contact between _his own_ genitals and those of the woman. Conversely,
on many girls, masculine attributes, and especially the male genital
organs, sometimes exert a stimulating influence. But in these cases
also, the complete fusion of the processes of detumescence and
contrectation occurs very gradually. Sometimes the boy himself is
greatly astonished to discover that close contact with a person whom he
loves leads to erection and even ejaculation. At the outset the impulse
is much less definite than it is in adults. It is by gradual stages only
that the sense of indefinite longing develops into the impulse towards
sexual union in coitus; at first the imagination contemplates pictures
of a quite indefinite character.

Although, as we have seen, the processes both of detumescence and of
contrectation may manifest themselves primarily in childhood as
associated conscious sensations, by far the most common event is for the
processes of contrectation to appear separately, before those of
detumescence. From an inquiry relating to eighty-six heterosexual men,
who to the best of my belief were sexually normal, I ascertained that in
more than 75 per cent., the feelings of contrectation appeared first,
and not until after this had happened was the boy's consciousness
attracted by sensations in the genital organs. This appears rather
remarkable, inasmuch as we must assume that in the phylogeny of our
species the processes of detumescence appeared earlier. Originally, in
the earlier ancestral types, reproduction was effected by fission or
gemmation (simple division or budding), without any necessity for
conjugation with another individual of the species; and reproduction by
gemmation corresponds to the processes of detumescence, to the
ejaculation of the spermatozoa by the male. But although in most
individuals the processes of detumescence make their appearance in
consciousness only in a secondary manner, it does not follow that in the
actual course of development they are also secondary. They do not,
indeed, enter so early the sphere of conscious impulses, but there is a
considerable amount of evidence to show that important processes are
going on in the external genital organs long before consciousness is
directly affected by these processes--consider, for example, the
consequences of early castration.

CASE 5.--This is a typical example of the primary awakening of the
contrectation impulse, and the secondary superposition of the phenomena
of detumescence. The patient is a man thirty-two years of age, somewhat
neurasthenic, but, as far as I could ascertain, free from any other
morbid manifestations. "At the age of seven I went to school; at first
to a private school, in which little boys and girls were co-educated. In
our playtime also the sexes were not separated; the girls came as
friends to my house, and I visited them at theirs. Soon I became
especially intimate with one of the girls; we did our lessons together.
Thus it went on until I was nine years old, when I went to a school for
boys only. My friendship with the girl at the other school persisted,
however; we met from time to time, and all the more readily because a
friendship had sprung up between our respective parents; they used to
make holiday journeys together, and we children went with them. From the
time when we were first at school together, this girl had always been
more dear to me than the others, I do not know what it was in her by
which I was particularly charmed. Was it that her general appearance
seemed sympathetic to me; was it her abundant fair hair, her clear blue
eyes, or her frank and natural manner? I do not know. But I remember
quite distinctly that this same girl was a favourite with the other boys
also, that they preferred to play with her, to have her as their
companion. But it was to me that the girl, and perhaps her parents also,
gave the preference. There was never any impropriety in our mutual
relations; indeed, it is probable that I loved her too much for anything
of the kind to be possible. Every night, before I went to sleep, I
prayed to God to watch over this girl. As I have said before, my
fondness was reciprocated; we often spoke to one another about our love,
and of our dreams of the happy days to come, when we should be grown up,
and should become man and wife. This was quite a settled matter; we had
arranged every detail, how the wedding should be conducted, and whom we
should invite to the ceremony. With this girl I shared all my
possessions, although before I knew her I had been considered
close-fisted. I was often angry when in games with the other girls she
failed to win. In a word I can truthfully declare that I have hardly
ever since loved so fondly and so sincerely as I did then. When I went
to the boys' school, it was no longer possible for us to be together as
much as before. Thus it came to pass, that the less we saw of one
another, the less were my thoughts occupied with this girl. But I cannot
remember that my fondness for her was ever replaced by a similar passion
for a boy; nor, speaking generally, can I recall having ever at any time
had any kind of sexual inclination towards one of my own sex. I would
not venture absolutely to deny that this ever occurred; but, bearing in
mind what I have learned from you on several occasions, I have carefully
taxed my memory, and can only repeat what I told you at first, that I
remember nothing of the kind. Somewhat later, in my dreams, boys
occasionally played a part, but I cannot recall that these dreams about
boys had any sexual complexion. They were vague images of boys
sympathetic to me, but these dreams were not accompanied by any
excitement of the genital organs, or by any other sexual manifestation.
When I was thirteen years of age, my parents and those of my girl-friend
had taken us to spend the summer at a seaside resort. The girl and I
played together on the seashore, and occasionally, though we were now
somewhat old for such an amusement, we dug sand-castles. As small
children we had from time to time embraced one another, but a kiss had
been the most intimate contact we had experienced. One day we were
playing on the shore--I remember it very distinctly--and were rolling
about together in the sand; thus occupied we came into close physical
contact, and thereupon I had an erection. I remember too that the
sensation of this was very agreeable. I cannot describe this agreeable
feeling with precision, but there was no sense of sexual gratification,
nor definite voluptuous sensation. From this time forward I always had
the desire for close bodily contact with the girl. Moreover she was
continually in my thoughts, and this to a much greater extent than
formerly. It was my desire to gain a harmless pleasure by being always
with her; it was impossible for me to imagine that we should ever be
separated. I had naturally heard a great deal about marriage. With these
and with similar thoughts I was occupied, but I cannot recall my
thoughts in a more detailed manner. But to this day I remember very
clearly my desire that the girl and I should never be separated from one
another. We returned home, and in the ensuing winter, as in previous
winters, we met at intervals. Naturally, physical contact was now much
more difficult. One night I had a dream with seminal emission. Then, as
for a long time before, I had been thinking a great deal about the girl;
I dreamed of one of the scenes on the seashore which I have just
described; it was in this dream that I had my first seminal emission. My
fondness for the girl persisted. Only when she left the day-school in
the town, and was sent away to a boarding-school, did my passion
gradually abate. At first when she went away, I felt very unhappy and
very lonely. My parents forced me to go out for walks with other boys
and to play with them; I did so only with the greatest reluctance.
Later, the girl did not disappear completely from my circle of
acquaintances, but I lost all interest in her. From school I went to the
university, having just before begun to masturbate. From the time I went
to the university until the present day I have occasionally had
intercourse with women, and my sexual development has been perfectly
normal."

In so far as in what has gone before I have described the individual
processes, there appear to be no important differences between the boy
and the girl, over and above those dependent upon the different
structure of the genital organs in the respective sexes. But one notable
difference must now be indicated. Just as in adult life in the female
sex sexual anaesthesia is very frequently observed, so that in coitus the
specific voluptuous sensation is wanting, and indeed often enough the
impulse to coitus itself is actually in abeyance (whereas in men the
sexual impulse and sexual pleasure are very rarely absent), so also in
the case of children a similar difference between the sexes is
conspicuous. In female children the peripheral processes of the sexual
impulse are, comparatively speaking, far less active than in the case of
males. Thus it happens that, although in the girl the phenomena of the
contrectation impulses are hardly, if at all, less conspicuous than they
are in the boy, and appear at as early an age in the former as they do
in the latter, yet in respect of detumescence there is an important
distinction between girls and boys. A girl who has fallen in love with a
boy will be greatly interested in all his doings, and will gladly
embrace and even kiss him; but she will be far less disposed to proceed
to actions in which the genital organs play a part than would a boy with
a like affection for a girl. The same rule holds good when, in the
undifferentiated stage of the sexual impulse, homosexual sentiments and
practices ensue. In such cases, when girls are concerned, caresses of
all kinds will follow, but the genital organs will in all probability
not be involved; whereas in the case of an analogous fondness between
two boys, manipulation of the genital organs is very likely to occur.
Homosexual intimacies between girls are far more often platonic than
similar intimacies between boys.


I have had occasion several times to allude to the practice of
masturbation[38] by children, and will now proceed to give a more
detailed description. I have previously alluded to masturbation as a
manifestation of the detumescence impulse. Much more frequently,
however, it occurs in those in whom the phenomena of the contrectation
impulse have also been previously manifested. Sometimes it is a purely
organic act, the individual masturbating in the entire absence of any
imaginative sexual ideas; but at other times the imagination plays a
notable part in the process, alike in children and in adults. When an
imaginative idea is concerned in the process of masturbation, it is the
idea of the object of the contrectation impulse; that is to say, the boy
when masturbating thinks now of a girl, now, again (and this especially
during the undifferentiated stage of the sexual impulse), of a boy, or
in many cases of an adult; in the cases of girls who masturbate similar
relationships obtain, Just as during youth masturbation is more commonly
practised in association with than without imaginative sexual ideas, so
also is it in the case of children; and even though imaginative activity
may often be in abeyance when the masturbatory act is begun, during the
progress of the act the imagination usually comes into operation. None
the less, masturbation of a purely mechanical kind, in which the
imagination plays no part, is comparatively more common during childhood
than it is during youth. The peripheral processes of the detumescence
impulse and the central processes of the contrectation impulse are not
at this early age so intimately associated as they are later in life.
Even when the contrectation impulse is already awakened, as usually
happens before the detumescence impulse becomes active, when the
detumescence impulse finally manifests itself, its gratification by
means of masturbation without any imaginative activity is comparatively
common in children. In such cases artificial stimulation of the genital
organs is effected quite independently of the longing for intimate
physical contact with and the embraces of another individual.

In an earlier chapter (pp. 31, 32) I have explained that in the adult
the voluptuous sensation is closely associated with the psychosexual
perceptions, associated, that is to say, with the mode of the
contrectation impulse; I stated that as a rule the voluptuous sensation
was experienced to the full in those cases only in which the sexual act
was one adequate to the contrectation impulse of the person concerned.
But when the association between the processes of detumescence and those
of contrectation has not yet occurred, the voluptuous sensation is
independent of the contrectation impulse. This explains the fact that in
the child both the peripheral voluptuous sensation, and also the
voluptuous acme and the sense of satisfaction, are more frequently
independent of the processes of contrectation than is the case in the
adult Gradually the two groups of processes become associated with one
another; and, as we have learned, this association frequently occurs
even in childhood. In the latter case, the voluptuous acme and the
subjective sense of satisfaction ensue only when the sexual act or the
sexual idea is adequate. But we must always remember that in the child
more often than in the adult the voluptuous acme and the sense of
satisfaction occur independently of the processes of contrectation.

An ejaculation of fluid secretions does not invariably occur when
masturbation is practised. Whereas in the adult masturbation ordinarily
culminates in ejaculation, in the child this is not usually the case; at
any rate, as regards many children the occurrence of ejaculation is not
demonstrable. I refer in this connexion to what I have already stated on
page 54 _et seq._ It is self-evident from what has been previously said
that during the second period of childhood masturbation is more likely
than during the first period to culminate in ejaculation.

The methods by which the artificial stimulation of the genital organs is
effected are extremely variable. The commonest way to masturbate is with
the hands, but this is by no means the invariable practice. All kinds of
little artifices are employed, partly to render it possible to
masturbate unobserved in the presence of others, and partly in order to
increase the intensity of the stimulus. Boys sometimes manipulate their
genital organs through their trouser pockets; some even make a hole in
the pocket to enable them to masturbate more effectually. In other
cases, children, especially girls, lean against some article of
furniture--a chair or a table--apparently in a harmless manner, but
really in such a way that pressure is exercised upon the genital
organs, which are stimulated by pressure or friction. In some, strong
mechanical stimulation is required; in others, weaker stimuli suffice,
because the way has previously been sufficiently prepared by psychical
processes. In female children frequently, but less often in males,
masturbation is effected by rubbing the crossed thighs one against the
other. We learn from many girls that they tie a knot in the nightgown or
chemise, and masturbate by rubbing this against the genital organs. I
must allude also to horseback riding, working the treadle of a sewing
machine, cycling, the vibration of a carriage or railway train in
motion; we must, however, be careful not to attach undue importance to
these factors of masturbation, for in such cases much depends upon the
individuality, and much also upon the external mechanical conditions---
as, for instance, on the construction of the saddle used in cycling and
the like. In the case of the male genital organs, the glans penis is the
most sensitive portion, and mechanical stimulation of this structure in
especial is likely to induce the practice of masturbation; in the case
of the female genital organs, on the other hand, it is the clitoris
which is most sensitive, and of which, therefore, we have especially to
think in this connexion. But there is a tendency to overestimate the
proportion of cases in which stimulation of the glans penis, in the
male, or the clitoris, in the female, is the exciting cause of
masturbation. In a very large number of cases of masturbation, it is not
the glans, but some other portion of the penis, which is the focus of
stimulation. In girls, also, in numerous instances, masturbation is
effected by stimulation of the labia minora, and I am inclined to
believe that the importance of the labia minora is in this respect not
inferior to that of the clitoris. In solitude, and above all in bed,
masturbation can naturally be effected much more readily. Some little
girls grasp a pillow between their legs in such a way as to give rise to
a masturbatory stimulus. Others introduce cylindrical objects into the
vagina, a practice much commoner among fully-grown girls than among
children. Still, physicians are sometimes called on to remove such
articles from the vaginae of quite little girls. But it is an error to
suppose that the hymen is frequently ruptured by practices of this kind;
the rupture of the hymen is far too painful for it to be likely to be
effected during masturbation.

Erogenic zones, that is to say, areas of the surface of the body whose
stimulation gives rise, directly or indirectly, to voluptuous
sensations, are met with often in early childhood. First of all we have
those parts of the genital organs mentioned in the last paragraph;
secondly, other regions of the body. Thus, in some individuals,
stimulation of the anal and gluteal regions gives rise to voluptuous
sensations. Freud[39] maintains that voluntary retention of the faeces is
utilised for this purpose, but this appears to me very doubtful. In many
children, however, gentle scratching of the anal region or the buttocks,
and also more powerful stimulation of the gluteal region, such as occurs
in flagellation, are associated with sexual excitement. Some children,
with this end in view, stimulate the anal region with the finger or with
some instrument. Other erogenic zones are also at times found in
children, but not often; whereas in adults such erogenic zones are
numerous, but differ greatly in different individuals. In this
connexion, I need merely allude to the production of voluptuous
sensations by tickling the nape of the neck.

Attempts have often been made to determine the comparative frequency of
masturbation in the two sexes. On one point at least all writers are
agreed, viz., that of boys an overwhelming majority masturbate
occasionally. The only point in dispute is whether there are any
exceptions. For my own part, I am confident that exceptions exist. I
have received direct information on the point from leading men of
science, and from others whose absolute veracity I have never had any
reason to doubt. Healthy men, endowed with a normal sexual impulse, are
occasionally to be found who have never masturbated at all. I go
further, and believe that such persons are by no means so rare as many
authorities maintain. Nevertheless, as regards the male sex, differences
of opinion are, after all, not very extensive, since it is only in
relation to a minority that these differences exist. But when we pass
to the question of the extent of masturbation among girls, the
differences become more acute. On this point also I have endeavoured to
obtain exact information by means of numerous inquiries, with the
following results. Among girls, masturbation is less general than it is
among boys. Among those who have never masturbated during girlhood, we
find women who as adults have powerful sexual impulse. On the other
hand, many girls who masturbate do so very often. I believe, indeed,
that cases in which masturbation is performed twice or thrice in brief
succession are _relatively_ commoner among girls than they are among
boys. As regards this point my own experience harmonises with that of
Guttceit.[40] On the other hand, Guttceit's assumption that almost all
girls who attain the age of eighteen or twenty years without any
opportunity for sexual intercourse practise masturbation conflicts with
my own experience. I am acquainted with a number of women of a fairly
ardent temperament who do not masturbate, although they have no
opportunity for sexual intercourse. Moreover, this view is confirmed by
the common experience regarding the relative sexual anaesthesia of women;
it is an admitted fact that complete sexuality is in women far less
readily awakened than it is in men.

I must take this opportunity of referring at some length to a matter
which, though somewhat obscure, is none the less profoundly interesting.
In many instances sexual excitement occurs in children as the result of
a feeling of anxiety; in boys such anxiety may lead to ejaculation, with
or without erection, and with more or less voluptuous sensation. A
schoolboy informed me that he had had a seminal emission with a slight
sense of voluptuous pleasure when in class he was in difficulties with a
passage of unseen translation, and he was afraid he would be unable to
finish the passage before the end of the lesson. Another reported to me
a precisely similar experience; he was overcome with anxiety during a
written examination, and had a seminal emission. A third had an
ejaculation when, being detected in some offence against school
discipline, he was sent for by the headmaster, and was afraid he would
be expelled. Quite a number of similar cases have been reported to me of
sexual excitement occurring in childhood as a sequel to anxiety. I have
recorded the facts, and do not propose to discuss exhaustively the
theoretical aspect of the matter. Perhaps the phenomenon is allied to
masochism, since anxiety is to a certain extent painful. We may also, in
this connexion, think of the seminal emissions sometimes observed in
cases of suicidal hanging. Freud's theory may also be mentioned, that
the anxiety-neurosis is referable to certain sexual processes; but we
must not forget that Freud makes a similar assumption in the case of
other neuroses as well. Stekel,[41] one of Freud's pupils, in an
elaborate monograph, also lays stress on the sexual factor of the
anxiety-neurosis. In my own view, however, Freud's generalisation is too
comprehensive; inasmuch as he symbolises all things in accordance with
his own peculiar preconceptions, the concept sexual receives, in his
hands, an undue extension. But I do not deny the occasional association
of sexual excitement with a sense of anxiety. Certain boys would appear
to have a peculiar predisposition to the occurrence of such processes;
at any rate, several persons have told me that during childhood they had
frequently had ejaculations as a result of feelings of anxiety. As a
rule, however, each of these persons has had such an experience either
once only, or but very few times. Two identical instances have been
reported to me as occurring in girls--ejaculation with an indefinite
voluptuous sensation as a sequel of anxiety. These girls were from
thirteen to fourteen years of age. In one of the two, the phenomenon
recurred several times; and even at the present day, when she is a
fully-grown woman, she occasionally experiences ejaculation in connexion
with a feeling of anxiety.

CASE 6.--A student, twenty years of age, described his experiences to me
in the following terms:--As regards his sexual development, he remembers
that he was sixteen years of age when he first experienced sexual
sensations. Before this time he had been told by other boys about sexual
intercourse, masturbation, and many other things. He had, however,
never masturbated, though he had once or twice attempted to do so. One
day, when he was in the Upper Second Class, a mathematical problem was
given out, and as he found a difficulty in solving it, he became
anxious, all the more because his chances of promotion to a higher class
were largely dependent on his success. When he had barely finished half
the necessary calculations, the master announced that there were only
ten minutes left, at the end of which time the exercise books would be
collected. Thereupon his anxiety became extreme, and simultaneously he
experienced his first seminal emission. He is unable to give a more
detailed description of what occurred, and does not remember having had
an erection; but, as he expresses it, the sensation was extremely
pleasant. Subsequently, when in the First Class, the same experience
recurred several times, that is to say, he had a seminal emission as a
result of a similar feeling of anxiety. In other respects his sexual
development was normal. Seminal dreams were accompanied by the idea of
contact with a woman. On one occasion, however, he had a seminal
emission during the night in association with a feeling of anxiety. He
dreamed that he was being pursued by a mad dog, when suddenly he became,
as it were, paralysed and unable to run a single step further. The
consequent acute anxiety culminated in emission.


During sleep, sexually mature men and many sexually mature women have
from time to time involuntary sexual orgasms;[42] these occur chiefly in
persons without opportunities for sexual intercourse, who do not
practise masturbation. In such involuntary orgasms the male ejaculates
semen, the female indifferent glandular secretions. As a rule, the
ejaculation is accompanied not merely by a voluptuous sensation, but
also by a psychical process corresponding with the mode of sexual
sensibility of the person concerned. A normal man during the orgasm
dreams that he is embracing a woman; a normal woman that she is
embracing a man; a homosexual man dreams of the embraces of another man.
The dream-ejaculation is distinguished from the waking act of
intercourse to this extent, that in the former the ejaculation usually
takes place during the preparatory stages to the act of
intercourse--during kissing, physical contact, or the embrace--so that
the dream stops short of complete sexual intercourse. But in other
respects the dream ordinarily corresponds to the psychical processes of
the waking state. The same correspondence exists as regards sexual
dreams that do not culminate in ejaculation. Children also experience
sexual dreams either with or without orgasm. In those who have never
masturbated in the waking state, a sexual dream is commonly the cause of
the first experience of ejaculation; and this occurs more often than is
generally believed. More especially in the female sex I have come across
many cases in which the orgasm made a primary appearance during sleep.
In both sexes alike it is usual for psychosexual phenomena to manifest
themselves before the erotic dream makes its appearance; a boy, for
instance, will during his waking life have felt an attraction towards
members of the other sex before he has begun to dream of embracing a
girl. We must not, however, forget that, apart from those cases in which
a dream beyond question first unveils to consciousness the psychosexual
life, dreams are forgotten very rapidly indeed, especially when the
memory is not stimulated by so vivid an occurrence as the sexual orgasm.
Hence, even though it is true that the psychosexual life commonly
appears to begin during the waking state, we must admit that it is quite
likely that psychosexual dreams may have previously occurred and have
been forgotten. Thus, in many individuals, sexual perversions make their
first appearance in dreams. It has even been suggested that dreams may
exercise a similar influence to that of post-hypnotic suggestion; that
is to say, that a dream may be the actual originating cause of sexual
perversion. This is a matter which I cannot discuss further, more
especially in view of the fact that the whole idea is too hypothetical.

The earlier the age at which the child begins to ripen sexually, the
earlier do sexual dreams and nocturnal ejaculations make their
appearance. I have known of numerous instances in which children ten or
eleven years of age have had sexual dreams; occasionally, even, I have
been informed of the occurrence of such dreams in children of seven or
eight years of age. In children, as in adults, the object which is
sexually exciting in the waking state plays a leading part in the sexual
dream. But in the sexual dreams of children the imagination is even more
active than it is in the sexual dreams of adults. All kinds of perverse
dreams may, in children, accompany the emission, even when the
corresponding ideas have no erotic association in the waking state.
Things of which the child has learned from fairy tales, stories of
robbers, of imprisoned or enchanted princesses, princes, fettered
slaves--all may play a part in the psychosexual processes of the
dream-life. Anyone unaware of the fact that in the great majority of
children this tendency disappears spontaneously in the course of the
further development of the sexual life might too readily infer the
existence of some morbid perversion. In such instances we must, indeed,
bear in mind the possibility of sexual perversion, especially in view of
the fact that sexually perverse adults are often able to trace back into
childhood the memory of sexual dreams characteristic of their peculiar
type of perversion. Occasionally the feelings of anxiety of which we
have spoken above may, even in dreams, lead to the occurrence of
involuntary ejaculations. Thus we are told of dreams of pursuit by
robbers or by wild animals, or of dreams of missing a train the dreamer
has been running to catch, in which ejaculations occur. In isolated
cases the dreams of children which are associated with ejaculations may
be quite indistinct; in such cases, just as sometimes in the sexual
dreams of adults, it is impossible to recognise any definite
relationship to the psychosexual feelings of the waking state. In this
connexion no difference between the sexes can be shown to exist, except
this, that, at any rate as far as my own experience goes, nocturnal
ejaculations are much more often absent in girls than in boys.
Occasionally, manual or other artificial stimulation of the genital
organs is effected during sleep; I have myself known several instances
of this, both in boys and in girls. In several cases, at least, there
were satisfactory grounds for believing that we were not concerned with
masturbation practised at night in the waking state, but all the
indications pointed to the fact that the processes wore carried on
unconsciously during sleep. In isolated cases I have had children
watched throughout the night, in order to clear up this point, and my
conclusion was thus confirmed that children do at times play with the
genital organs during sleep.

A classical description of her first nocturnal orgasm is given by Madame
Roland in her _Memoires Particuliers_,[43] written during the last
months of her life in prison in Paris at the time of the Terror. She
menstruated for the first time, she informs us, soon after she had been
partially enlightened regarding sexual matters by her grandmother. Even
before menstruation began, she had experienced sexual excitement in
dreams. "I had sometimes been awakened from a deep sleep in a most
remarkable manner. My imagination played no part in what occurred; it
was occupied with far more serious matters, and my tender conscience was
far too strictly on guard against the deliberate pursuit of pleasure for
me to make any attempt to dwell in imagination on what I regarded as a
forbidden province of thought. But an extraordinary outbreak awakened my
senses from their quiet slumber, and, my constitution being a very
vigorous one, a process whose nature and cause were equally unknown to
me made its appearance spontaneously. The first result of this
experience was the onset of great mental anguish; I had learned from my
'Philothea'[44] that it was forbidden to enjoy any bodily pleasure,
except in lawful wedlock; this teaching recurred to my mind; the
sensations I had experienced could certainly be described as
pleasurable; I had, therefore, committed a sin, and, indeed, a sin of
the most shameful and grievous character, because it was the sin most of
all displeasing to the Lamb without blemish and without spot. Great
disturbance of mind, prayers and penances; how could I avoid a
repetition of the offence? for I had not foreseen it in any way, but in
the moment of the experience I had taken no trouble to prevent it. My
watchfulness became extreme; I noticed that when lying in certain
positions I was more exposed to the danger, and I avoided these
positions with anxious conscientiousness. My uneasiness became so great
that ultimately I came to wake up before the catastrophe. When unable to
prevent it, I would jump out of bed, and, notwithstanding the cold of
winter, stand bare-footed on the polished floor, crossing my arms, and
praying earnestly to God to guard me from the snares of Satan." She goes
on to describe her subsequent attempts to mortify the flesh by means of
fasting.

I have hitherto described the individual sexual processes which are
observed during childhood, I have already explained that in some, one
process, in some, another process, is alone present, or, at any rate,
preponderates. For instance, a girl may be sexually attracted towards a
boy without the genital organs playing any conscious part in the
attraction. But the converse may also occur. Moreover, the strength of
the sexual feeling is subject to extensive individual variations. In
some children the sexual impulse is so powerful that scandalous
misconduct can hardly be avoided; on the other hand, we see cases in
which the sexual impulse manifests itself at the normal age, but is so
weak that it can scarcely be said to play any important part in the
consciousness of the child. This is true of both components of the
sexual impulse, of the phenomena of contrectation, no less than of those
of detumescence. Formerly it was very generally believed that in
sexually perverse persons the sexual sensations awakened unusually early
in life. There is no foundation for this view. Normal sexual sensations
can be detected very early in childhood. The existence of these was
ignored, simply because the study of the normal was neglected for the
study of the perverse. Moreover, the strength of the sexual sensations
has no necessary association with the existence of perversions; these
latter sometimes occur without being particularly strong. On the other
hand, qualitatively normal sexual sensations may be associated with
sexual hyperaesthesia, and they may attain a notable strength even during
childhood.

In the third chapter I showed that in childhood the sexes are
differentiated both physically and mentally, altogether apart from the
genital organs and the sexual impulse; and I pointed out that games in
particular afforded indications of mental sexual differentiation. Many
games, indeed, may even be regarded as direct manifestations of the
sexual impulse, and I must therefore now return to the consideration of
this topic; but I shall confine myself to certain phenomena observable
in the animal world, since the games of animals are, in this connexion,
so much simpler than those of children. Play constitutes a major part of
the activities of young animals; think, for instance, of a kitten
playing with a hanging tassel or with a ball, of puppies chasing one
another, and of young birds playing with fluttering wings. The games of
young animals often exhibit the character of love-games, and are in that
case sexually differentiated. Various authors, and especially Brehm,
have recorded numerous examples of this; I give here a few instances,
quoted from Groos.[45] The young male, even before its testicles have
developed, woos the female by movements, song, or other characteristic
sounds. The female, also sexually immature, responds coquettishly to
these advances of the male. Song, which Brehm regards as a sign of the
awakening of love, makes its appearance at an age when the animal is
still unfitted for the reproductive act.

"Young magpies (_Corvus pica_) address one another in September, and
often in August and in October, in consecutive clucking notes, and in
this way make exactly the same kind of noise that they are always heard
making in early spring just before the pairing season. The young male
green woodpecker (_Picus viridicanus_) sings in September as beautifully
as in April, as I have myself heard more than once; the young great
spotted woodpecker (_Picus major_) may even be heard at times in autumn,
just as in spring, making his characteristic tapping sound as he
explores hard branches in search of insects. Both varieties of creeper
begin to sing before they have changed their youthful plumage; their
song closely resembles that of the adult birds in spring, but the note
is somewhat shorter and weaker. Similarly, both the German varieties of
crossbill commonly begin to sing before losing the plumage
characteristic of youth. Young house-sparrows and hedge-sparrows not
only chatter and swear at one another like the full-grown birds at
pairing time, but also like the latter the young birds distend their
throats, let their wings droop, peck at one another, and in fact behave
as exactly as they will next spring when fully grown. Young linnets also
begin to sing before losing their youthful plumage, learn to sing well
during the moulting season, and often continue to warble right on into
the winter; in a mild winter young linnets will sing just as well as old
ones. The young woodlark begins to sing as soon as its first moulting is
nearly over, and not only does this when perching, but flies aloft like
the adult bird in the spring-time, and soars for a long time, singing
continually. Titmice all sing when still quite young, but more
especially the large crested titmouse and the marsh titmouse; the notes
of the young marsh titmouse are precisely similar to those with which in
spring the adult bird sings to his mate; and as regards the crested
titmouse, in October 1821, I observed a young male bird making advances
of a most marked character to a young hen, whilst the hen drooped its
wings and spread out its tail--in short, these two young birds were
behaving exactly as do the full-grown birds before pairing in the
spring. The young cock starling conducts itself precisely as if it
wished to pair. At the beginning of September, as soon as moulting is
completed, this bird returns to its birthplace, apparently in order to
take possession of the nest. It perches on the tree-top, just like the
full-grown bird in March, and sings almost for the whole morning. While
still perching, it flaps its wings, quarrels with and chases other young
starlings; sometimes it even creeps into the hollow tree or other
hiding-place containing the nest in which it was hatched. The yellow
wagtail sings while still in its youthful plumage, and the young birds
chase one another about while in this condition; during and immediately
after the first moulting, these birds produce peculiar trilling notes,
identical with those with which in April the cock bird salutes his mate,
and they may also be seen in the remarkable fluttering flight
characteristic of many birds in the pairing season. The grey wood wren
begins to sing before the first moulting, but sings more powerfully
during and after moulting, right on into the month of October, singing
like a full-grown bird. At the same time this bird twists the body from
side to side, and moves the tail to and fro; it quarrels also with birds
of its own species, and quarrels, too, with other birds, sometimes with
birds as much as four times its own size. In August and September young
mountain fowl and heath fowl utter love calls to each other, not,
indeed, so loudly as those of the adult birds, nor in association with
the characteristic movements of the body made by these latter in the
spring-time, but still unmistakable love calls.... According to Hudson,
many kinds of American woodpecker carry on a kind of duet, and they
practise this artistic performance from the very earliest youth. On
meeting, the male and female, standing close together, and facing each
other, utter their clear ringing concert, one emitting loud single
measured notes, while the notes of its fellow are rapid, rhythmical
triplets; their voices have a joyous character, and seem to accord, thus
producing a kind of harmony. This manner of singing is perhaps most
perfect in the oven-bird (_Furnarius_), and it is very curious that the
_young birds, when only partially fledged_, are constantly heard in the
nest or oven apparently practising these duets in the intervals when the
parents are absent; single measured notes, triplets, and long concluding
trills are all repeated with wonderful fidelity, and in character these
notes are utterly unlike the hunger cry, which is like that of other
fledglings."

In such cases as those just enumerated, actual copulation is not
effected; but animals still sexually immature may perform coitus-like
acts, and Groos's work contains observations of these made by Seitz and
others. Seitz saw an antelope six weeks old making copulatory movements.
In young dogs such movements may often be observed, also in young
stallions and young bulls.

The view that in such cases the movements are imitative merely is
untenable, for young animals which have never had any opportunity of
watching the physical manifestations of love in older ones, will
nevertheless themselves exhibit such manifestations. At most it remains
open to dispute whether in these cases it is still permissible to speak
of love-games, as do Groos and others, or whether we should not rather
speak simply of manifestations of the activity of the sexual impulse.
But the dispute does not involve differences of opinion regarding
matters of fact; it is purely terminological. For, in the first place,
Groos himself, who regards the games of childhood as a form of training,
suitable to the nature of the individual, for its subsequent activities,
recognises that games are sexually differentiated. He believes that we
have to do, not, as some think, with imitative processes, but with
preliminary practice, subserving the purposes of self-development; and
he considers that girls naturally turn to games adapted to train them
for their subsequent profession of motherhood, whilst boys incline to
games corresponding to their predestined activity as men. Even if we
accept this theory of Groos, we are compelled to recognise a sexual
element in the games of youthful animals. In addition, however, we must
note the fact that Groos gives a wider extension to the concept of play
than other writers, and that he regards as love-games processes which
others might perhaps describe as sexual manifestations. According to
Groos, caressing contact is to be regarded as playful when, in the
serious intercourse between the sexes, such contact appears to be merely
a preliminary activity rather than an end in itself. Here two cases are
possible: in one the carrying out of the instinctive activity to its
real end is prevented by incapacity or by ignorance; in the other, it is
prevented by a deliberate exercise of will. The former occurs in
children; the latter, often enough in adults. Whatever view we hold
regarding this matter, the sexually differentiated love-games of young
animals must be regarded as a manifestation of the sexual life. None the
less, in sexually immature animals, just as in the case of children,
sexual differentiation is not always so marked as it is in adults; and
it may happen that the sexes may exchange their roles. Cases observed by
Seitz have been published by Groos and also by myself.[46] I have myself
watched a young cow which repeatedly attempted to mount another young
cow; I have also on several occasions seen young bitches attempt to
cover dogs. To this part of our subject belongs the observation of
Exner, that when dogs are playing wildly with one another one hardly
ever sees a bitch among them. But if an exception should occur, the
bitch is usually a young one. In animals, sexual differentiation is not
complete until sexual maturity is attained, and the same is true of the
human species, although, as I have shown above, children already
manifest sexual differentiation in their games, their inclinations, and
their general conduct.

I have thought it desirable to refer to the play of animals in this
place, as well as to treat of the subject in its direct relationship to
the sexual impulse. What is true of play is true also of the other
interests and inclinations of the child, many of which are also
associated with the sexual life; these have been described earlier, so
that here I need merely allude to the matter in passing.


Hitherto I have described the sexual life of the child in so far as it
is the subject of direct observation or can be recalled to memory. But
it was explained at the outset that there is still another way of
gaining clear knowledge of the subject, namely, by experiment; and it
was shown that castration may be regarded as such an experiment.
Although the reproductive capacity of the male is not developed prior to
the formation of spermatozoa in the testicles, nevertheless we learn
from the effects of castration that the testicles exhibit important
functional activity much earlier in life. This fact was long overlooked,
and its importance is even to-day largely underestimated, because we
have been accustomed to regard the provision of an external secretion as
the only function of the testicle. But it is now firmly established that
these glands exercise influence in other ways. We know that bodily and
mental development are affected by the removal of the testicles; and
that the influence is greater the earlier in life the castration takes
place. A number of secondary sexual characters remain undeveloped. The
beard does not grow; in many instances a thick _panniculus adiposus_ is
formed; there are changes in the growth of the bones; the voice remains
a soprano; and the other reproductive organs are imperfectly developed,
the penis and the prostate remaining comparatively small An early
castration does not, of course, result in the obliteration of all
differences between the male and the female; we must rather say that a
part only of the typical differential characters of sex remain
undeveloped. The earlier assumption, that the secretion of semen
competent to effect fertilisation influenced the development of the
secondary sexual characters, has of late been more and more generally
abandoned. Many considerations tell against such a theory, more
especially a comparison of the three following facts. First, if
castration is not effected until after the formation of spermatozoa has
already begun, the familiar results of this operation are either
entirely wanting, or else appear to a small extent only, and are limited
to a small number of the secondary sexual characters. Secondly, the
results of castration are most marked when the operation is performed in
early childhood. Thirdly, when castration is effected in the later years
of childhood, but before the secretion of fertilising semen has taken
place, the results are intermediate in degree, being much less marked
than in the second class of cases, but more extensive than in the first.
If the secretion of a fertilising semen were the principal factor in the
development of the secondary sexual characters, we should expect the
results of castration to be the same whether the operation were
performed early in childhood or late so long as it was done before any
spermatozoa had been formed.

The secondary sexual characters are, therefore, independent of the
formation of spermatozoa, and the appearance of these characters must
depend upon other processes, occurring much earlier in life. Thus, in
persons who were castrated in the eighth or ninth year of life, we note
the presence of definite secondary sexual characters, which are, indeed,
less strongly developed than in normal persons, but which do not appear
at all when the castration has been effected at a still earlier age. The
varying views of different authors regarding the influence of castration
in early life upon the development of the secondary sexual characters
may readily be explained with reference to the individual differences
that may be observed in the functional activity of the testicles in
different males before the power of reproduction has been acquired. Just
as in boys the capacity for reproduction, and in girls the function of
menstruation, does not appear at a fixed and definite age, so also in
the case of the other processes that come into being under the influence
of the activity of the reproductive glands, we have to reckon with such
individual differences. For this reason, in persons who have been
castrated at the same age, the subsequent course of development may vary
to some degree, notwithstanding the apparent identity of the determining
factor in each case. In some, the pelvis, the beard, the voice, and the
mental qualities, develop in normal fashion; in others, there is
interference with the development of one or all of these characters. In
certain cases, the bodily structure is influenced by castration at an
age when the mental development is no longer affected. This explains the
fact that many oriental eunuchs, in whom castration is commonly effected
shortly before the seventh or eighth year of life, while they exhibit
the bodily configuration characteristic of the eunuch, are nevertheless
capable of experiencing heterosexual feelings, and even passionate love.

In Western countries we rarely have an opportunity of studying the full
consequences of castration, for with us the operation is hardly ever
performed so early in life as it is in the East; and the reports that
are available concerning oriental and other foreign eunuchs are to a
large extent untrustworthy. None the less, from such reports, and from
accounts that have come down to us from earlier days in the West (more
especially in the case of the boys who were formerly castrated in Italy
for the preservation of the soprano voice), we obtain evidence amply
sufficient to justify the statements made above. Even more convincing
are observations made on the lower animals. For example, in horses which
have been castrated at a very early age the sexual impulse remains
undeveloped; but we have to contrast with this the fact that a certain
number of geldings possess a well-marked sexual impulse, because in
these animals, though they were gelded while still immature, the
operation was performed too late. All these observations combine to
justify the inference that long before spermatozoa capable of effecting
fertilisation are formed in the testicles, changes occur in these
glands which are of great importance in relation to the sexual life,
both in the human species and in the lower animals.

We cannot speak so positively as to the truth of this in the case of the
reproductive glands in women, the ovaries, because alike in the human
female and in the females of the lower animals oophorectomy is less
commonly performed than is castration in the male. The literature of our
subject contains few references to this matter. What little information
we do possess, derived in part from travellers who have had
opportunities for observation in extra-European countries, and in part
from students of animal life, leads to the same conclusion as in the
case of males, namely, that long before the age commonly regarded as the
commencement of sexual maturity, important changes are going on in the
reproductive glands.

No detailed discussion can be attempted here of the other observations
there may be on record to show the existence of such sexual processes
during childhood. We may merely refer, for example, to the results of
the removal of one testicle before the commencement of puberty; this is
followed by a compensatory hypertrophy of the other testicle--whereas
removal of one testicle after the attainment of sexual maturity does not
lead to any such hypertrophy of the remaining testicle, or if so, only
in comparatively slight degree.

Although from the facts just stated it appears that, alike in human
beings and in the lower animals, before the formation of the specific
germ-cells and sperm-cells has begun in the reproductive glands of the
respective sexes important processes take place in these glands, it
still remains obscure what is the nature of these processes, and in what
manner they influence the organism. One question complicating this
problem, and one which is to-day frequently discussed, is the extent of
the influence exercised by the reproductive glands on the development of
the secondary sexual characters. I can here do little more than state
the difficulty. Whereas it was formerly assumed that the reproductive
glands exercised a direct determining influence in this direction, more
recently another view has been put forward, among others by Halban.[47]
According to this theory, the stimulus proceeding from the glands is
protective merely, not formative, nor directly stimulating the growth of
organs. In the fertilised ovum, it is supposed, the rudiment of sex
already exists, likewise the rudiment of the reproductive gland, and the
rudiments of the appropriate sexual characters. That is to say, the
development of the secondary sexual characters is not determined by the
presence of the reproductive gland; but the sex of the reproductive
gland and the associated sexual characters are already determined by
some common cause at the moment of fertilisation. But this theoretical
controversy has no very important bearing on the problem with which we
are especially concerned; and the influence of the reproductive gland
upon the development of the secondary sexual characters is admitted as
fully by Halban as it is by other writers, the only difference between
the two views lying in the dispute whether the influence of the glands
is of a formative or a protective nature. The influence exercised by the
reproductive glands on the development of the secondary sexual
characters can be adequately discussed, even though the precise way in
which that influence is exerted remains in dispute.

As to the general nature of the influence, two chief theories have to be
considered, viz., the nervous theory and the chemical theory. According
to the former, we must assume that a stimulus originates in the
reproductive glands, the testicles in the male, and the ovaries in the
female, and that these glands excite a kind of reflex action--that is,
that the stimulus passes to the central nervous system, and thence is
"reflected" to the periphery, where it promotes, either the growth of
particular parts of the body, _e.g._ the beard, or the development of
definite properties in certain organs, _e.g._ the characteristics of the
male larynx or of the female mamma. It is possible that the reflected
impulse stimulates trophic nerves. But it may be that in cases of early
castration the state of affairs is similar to that which obtains when
from earliest infancy one of the sense organs is wanting, as a result of
which the corresponding portions of the central nervous system are
found to undergo atrophy.[48] On this assumption, the manifest arrest of
the development of certain organs which results from castration is to be
regarded as the sequel of a partial atrophy of certain portions of the
brain. Of late, however, the chemical theory, that the results of
castration are dependent on the lack of the internal secretion of the
excised glands, has gained ground at the expense of the nervous theory.
The reason for this change of view is that much which was unsuspected in
former years has recently been learned about the chemical activities of
other glands. It suffices to allude to the function of the thyroid body.
According to this chemical theory, chemical substances are prepared in
the reproductive glands, and these substances exert a specific influence
in promoting the development of the secondary sexual characters. The
same theory has been invoked to account for the alleged ill effects of
sexual abstinence, it being suggested that the reabsorption of glandular
products properly destined for excretion may give rise to toxic
effects.[49] If it be assumed that the testicles can secrete substances
upon the influence of which the development of the secondary sexual
characters depends, it is obvious that these substances have nothing to
do with the spermatozoa, inasmuch as the testicles exert the influence
under consideration at an age at which the formation of spermatozoa has
not yet begun. The substances that act in this way must be of a
different kind. As was pointed out earlier in this book (p. 19), recent
researches have shown that the testicles possess a twofold activity; and
some French physicians even go so far as to say that the testicle is not
a single gland, but two glands. They distinguish between the gland that
prepares the spermatozoa and the interstitial gland.[50] Whilst the
formation of spermatozoa subserves the generative act, the function of
the interstitial gland is to prepare substances which pass into the
lymph or blood-stream, and give rise to the development of the secondary
sexual characters. Thus, the effects of castration are due, on this
theory, not to the absence of the formation of spermatozoa, but to the
absence of the products of the interstitial glands. French investigators
consider that the assumption that such an interstitial gland exists is
justified by the results of experimental work.

Whichever theory we accept, the chemical or the nervous, both theories
harmonise equally with the fact that in boys, before the formation of
spermatozoa begins, processes occur in the testicles which powerfully
influence the organism. Thus, we learn also from a study of the results
of castration how active is the sexual life even in childhood, since
thus early in life influences proceed from the reproductive glands
whereby the development of the secondary sexual characters is markedly
affected.


The principal sexual processes occurring in childhood have now been
described. Although we have been forced to admit the fact that in the
child sexual processes are much more extensive than has commonly been
believed, we must, on the other hand, guard ourselves against the
exaggerations of those who interpret everything in sexual terms. In the
chapter on diagnosis it will be necessary to refer to these
exaggerations once again.

As a rule, of course, the manifestations of the sexual life of the child
increase from year to year, although not always by continuous
gradations. Thus, in consequence of misdirection, sexual manifestations
may arise in the child, and then, if these evil communications are cut
off, such manifestations may cease. But, altogether apart from
deliberate seduction, we may observe periods of more rapid and periods
of less rapid sexual development, the causes of which may remain
obscure. Individual cases vary to such an extent, that it is impossible
to lay down a rule to which there are no exceptions. This applies
equally to both components of the sexual impulse, to the phenomena of
detumescence as well as to those of contrectation.

But although as we have seen, the development of the sexual life is not
always by regular progression, yet on the whole the increasing intensity
of sexual manifestations from the years of childhood to the termination
of the period of the puberal development cannot be denied. Especially
extensive are the changes occurring at the end of the second period of
childhood. At this period we note more particularly the development of
the outward signs of sexual maturity. In the boy, we observe the growth
of the beard and the pubic hair, and a more rapid enlargement of the
testicles and the other organs of reproduction. In the girl, the breasts
and the pelvis assume the adult female type, and ovulation and
menstruation begin. During this period, also, the mental changes are
extremely marked, even though in many cases these changes may have begun
considerably earlier. The internal organic changes make themselves felt
also in the sphere of action. The years of adolescence in the male are
characterised by an impulse to travel, to adventures, but in addition to
all kinds of ideal efforts and to religious activity. The loftiest
ethical ideas alternate with a self-conscious bumptiousness. A change of
disposition manifests itself which is sharply contrasted with the
behaviour at an earlier and a subsequent age. This is no less true of
the girl. That which formerly was no more than a vague indication, now
becomes a manifest quality. More and more does the feminine mode of
feeling display itself. The "tom-boyishness" so often seen in girls
during the second period of childhood disappears. The former tomboy has
become one[51]--

  "In whose orbs a shadow lies
   Like the dusk in evening skies,"

and we see her--

  "Standing, with reluctant feet,
   Where the brook and river meet,
   Womanhood and childhood fleet!

  "Gazing, with a timid glance,
   On the brooklet's swift advance,
   On the river's broad expanse!"

The considerations put forward in this chapter show us how necessary it
was to explain the conception of puberty at the very outset of this
work. If the period of the puberal development be understood to
correspond to the development and ripening of the sexual life, we see
that this development begins much earlier than is commonly assumed in
books on the subject. Writers have been too ready to identify with this
developmental period the appearance of certain _external_
manifestations, more especially the growth of the pubic hair in both
sexes, the development of the breasts in the female, and the breaking of
the voice in the male; and the appearance of certain definite outward
signs--in the girl, the first menstruation, and in the boy, the first
ejaculation--has usually been regarded as marking a turning-point in
this development. But neither in the boy is the occurrence of the first
ejaculation a proof of capacity for reproduction, or a proof that the
period of the puberal development is completed; nor in the girl is the
occurrence of the first menstruation, which may long precede the
establishment of the far more important function of ovulation,
characteristic in either of these respects. Observations made on
children, accounts given by children and memories of childhood, and the
results of castration (and oophorectomy),[52] all combine to prove the
occurrence of sexual processes during childhood, at least as early as
the beginning of the second period of childhood. At this time of life,
the psychosexual in especial often plays a great part. If,
notwithstanding all these facts, anyone desires to associate the
beginning or the end of the puberal development, as was formerly done,
with the appearance of "the external signs of puberty," no one can
prevent this usage. But the scientific investigator, the physician, the
schoolmaster, and the parents, should all alike fully understand that
such external processes comprise but a small part of all that
constitutes pubescence. A straining of terminology may at times be
permissible; but on no account must we allow currency to so disastrous
an error as the belief that the sexual life of the child either begins
or is completed with the appearance of these external signs. The sexual
life of the child begins long before, and the puberal development is not
completed till many years after, the appearance of these external signs,
which by most people are erroneously regarded as typical of pubescence.

Although I have detailed a number of phenomena characteristic of the
sexual life of the child, it must not be assumed that these phenomena
are common to all cases, or that every individual symptom is invariably
observed. As I have previously explained, numerous exceptions occur. In
some instances, only one symptom is discernible; in others, another
only. The commonest early manifestations of the sexual life in childhood
are, as was said before, the psychosexual phenomena. _Frequently, the
individual symptoms are so faintly marked that they can be detected only
by a very thorough and careful examination._ I wish merely to insist
upon the fact that during the years of childhood which are commonly
regarded as asexual, manifestations of the sexual life can with care
almost always be detected, although at times their detection is by no
means easy.

In conclusion, however, it is necessary to point out that there are a
certain number of children in whom up to the fourteenth year of life,
and even later, manifestations of the sexual life are hardly
discernible; but we have to remember that the results of castration
prove, as has been shown above, that even when, in early life, the
occurrence of sexual processes cannot be demonstrated, such processes
are nevertheless going on. We meet with individuals in whom, even during
the first years of youth, the development of the sexual life is
extremely backward. There are boys of fifteen or sixteen who from time
to time have an involuntary seminal emission, but who exhibit no other
indications whatever of an active sexual life--neither masturbation, nor
any discernible psychosexual processes. Nevertheless, in most cases of
this kind, more careful observation will bring to light much, besides
the occurrence of the involuntary seminal emissions, which points to an
awakening of sexuality. Still, in some individuals, it is remarkable how
long entire sexual innocence may persist. This is doubtless due in such
cases, not to any specially rigorous natural virtue, but simply to the
fact that in these cases sexual development is much slower than the
average. Those concerned are thus devoid of all understanding of the
sexual, just in the same way as persons born blind lack all
understanding of colour. In most of the cases in which such retardation
occurs, the sexual life subsequently becomes entirely normal, showing
that the only abnormality was the exceptional delay in the occurrence of
the various processes. I have myself seen a number of cases in which the
development of the sexual life was delayed to such an extent that
ejaculation during coitus was not effected until towards the end of the
third decade of life, although erections, and even occasional nocturnal
emissions, had occurred long before. I believe that cases of this kind
are to a small extent only, if at all, the result of educational
influences, and they are in no way dependent upon the so-called sexual
neurasthenia; we are concerned simply with a retardation of development,
dependent upon congenital predisposition.



