
HOW TO CURE

Apoplexy, Bad Breath and Quinsy.

1. APOPLEXY.--Apoplexy occurs only in the corpulent or obese, and those of
gross or high living.

_Treatment._--Raise the head to a nearly upright position; loosen all tight
clothes, strings, etc., and apply cold water to the head and warm water and
warm cloths to the feet. Have the apartment cool and well ventilated. Give
nothing by the mouth until the breathing is relieved, and then only
draughts of cold water.

2. BAD BREATH.--Bad or foul breath will be removed by taking a teaspoonful
of the following mixture after each meal: One ounce chloride of soda, one
ounce liquor of potassa, one and one-half ounces phosphate of soda, and
three ounces of water.

3. QUINSY.--This is an inflammation of the tonsils, or common inflammatory
sore throat; commences with a slight feverish attack, with considerable
pain and swelling of the tonsils, causing some difficulty in swallowing; as
the attack advances, these symptoms become more intense, there is headache,
thirst, a painful sense of tension, and acute darting pains in the ears.
The attack is generally brought on by exposure to cold, and lasts from five
to seven days, when it subsides naturally, or an abscess may form in
tonsils and burst, or the tonsils may remain enlarged, the inflammation
subsiding.

_Home Treatment._--The patient should remain in a warm room, the diet
chiefly milk and good broths, some cooling laxative and diaphoretic
medicine may be given; but the greatest relief will be found in the
frequent inhalation of the steam of hot water through an inhaler, or in the
old-fashioned way through the spout of a teapot.

       *       *       *       *       *


{366}

Sensible Rules for the Nurse.

"Remember to be extremely neat in dress; a few drops of hartshorn in the
water used for _daily_ bathing will remove the disagreeable odors of warmth
and perspiration.

"Never speak of the symptoms of your patient in his presence, unless
questioned by the doctor, whose orders you are always to obey _implicitly_.

"Remember never to be a gossip or tattler, and always to hold sacred the
knowledge which, to a certain extent, you must obtain of the private
affairs of your patient and the household in which you nurse.

"Never contradict your patient, nor argue with him, nor let him see that
you are annoyed about anything.

"Never _whisper_ in the sick room. If your patient be well enough, and
wishes you to talk to him, speak in a low, distinct voice, on cheerful
subjects. Don't relate painful hospital experiences, nor give details of
the maladies of former patients, and remember never to startle him with
accounts of dreadful crimes or accidents that you have read in the
newspapers.

"_Write_ down the orders that the physician gives you as to time for giving
the medicines, food, etc.

"Keep the room bright (unless the doctor orders it darkened).

"Let the air of the room be as pure as possible, and keep everything in
order, but without being fussy and bustling.

"The only way to remove dust in a sick room is to wipe everything with a
damp cloth.

"Remember to carry out all vessels covered. Empty and wash them
immediately, and keep some disinfectant in them.

"Remember that to leave the patient's untasted food by his side, from meal
to meal, in hopes that he will eat it in the interval, is simply to prevent
him from taking any food at all.

"Medicines, beef tea or stimulants, should never be kept where the patient
can see them or smell them.

"Light-colored clothing should be worn by those who have the care of the
sick, in preference to dark-colored apparel; particularly if the disease is
of a contagious nature. Experiments have shown that black and other dark
colors will absorb more readily the subtle effluvia that emanates from sick
persons than white or light colors."

       *       *       *       *       *


{367}

Longevity.

The following table exhibits very recent mortality statistics, showing the
average duration of life among persons of various classes:

                  _Employment_       _Years_.

  Judges                                65
  Farmers                               64
  Bank Officers                         64
  Coopers                               58
  Public Officers                       57
  Clergymen                             56
  Shipwrights                           55
  Hatters                               54
  Lawyers                               54
  Rope Makers                           54
  Blacksmiths                           51
  Merchants                             51
  Calico Printers                       51
  Physicians                            51
  Butchers                              50
  Carpenters                            49
  Masons                                48
  Traders                               46
  Tailors                               44
  Jewelers                              44
  Manufacturers                         43
  Bakers                                43
  Painters                              43
  Shoemakers                            43
  Mechanics                             43
  Editors                               40
  Musicians                             39
  Printers                              38
  Machinists                            36
  Teachers                              34
  Clerks                                34
  Operatives                            32

"It will be easily seen, by these figures, how a quiet or tranquil life
affects longevity. The phlegmatic man will live longer, all other things
being equal, than the sanguine, nervous individual. Marriage is favorable
to longevity, and it has also been ascertained that women live longer than
men." {368}

[Illustration: HOT WATER THROAT BAG. HOT WATER BAG.]

HOW TO APPLY AND USE HOT WATER IN ALL DISEASES.

1. THE HOT WATER THROAT BAG. The hot water throat bag is made from fine
white rubber fastened to the head by a rubber band (see illustration), and
is an unfailing remedy for catarrh, hay fever, cold, toothache, headache,
earache, neuralgia, etc.

2. THE HOT WATER BOTTLE. No well regulated house should be without a hot
water bottle. It is excellent in the application of hot water for
inflammations, colic, headache, congestion, cold feet, rheumatism, sprains,
etc., etc. It is an excellent warming pan and an excellent feet and hand
warmer when riding. These hot water bags in any variety can be purchased at
any drug store.

3. Boiling water may be used in the bags and the heat will be retained many
hours. They are soft and pliable and pleasant to the touch, and can be
adjusted to any part of the body.

4. Hot water is good for constipation, torpid liver, and relieves colic and
flatulence, and is of special value.

5. _Caution_. When hot water bags or any hot fomentation {369} is removed,
replace dry flannel and bathe parts in tepid water and rub till dry.

6. By inflammations it is best to use hot water and then cold water. It
seems to give more immediate relief. Hot water is a much better remedy than
drugs, paragoric, Dover's powder or morphine. Always avoid the use of
strong poisonous drugs when possible.

7. Those who suffer from cold feet there is no better remedy than to bathe
the feet in cold water before retiring and then place a hot water bottle in
the bed at the feet. A few weeks of such treatment results in relief if not
cure of the most obstinate case.

       *       *       *       *       *


HOW TO USE COLD WATER.

Use a compress of cold water for acute or chronic inflammation, such as
sore throat, bronchitis, croup, inflammation of the lungs, etc. If there is
a hot and aching pain in the back apply a compress of cold water on the
same, or it may simply be placed across the back or around the body. The
most depends upon the condition of the patient.

[Illustration]

{370}

Practical Rules for Bathing.

[Illustration]

1. Bathe at least once a week all over, thoroughly. No one can preserve his
health by neglecting personal cleanliness. Remember, "Cleanliness is akin
to Godliness."

2. Only mild soap should be used in bathing the body.

3. Wipe quickly and dry the body thoroughly with a moderately coarse towel.
Rub the skin vigorously. {371}

4. Many people have contracted severe and fatal diseases by neglecting to
take proper care of the body after bathing.

5. If you get up a good reaction by thorough rubbing in a mild temperature,
the effect is always good.

6. Never go into a cold room, or allow cold air to enter the room until you
are dressed.

7. Bathing in cold rooms and in cold water is positively injurious, unless
the person possesses a very strong and vigorous constitution, and then
there is great danger of laying the foundation of some serious disease.

8. Never bathe within two hours after eating. It injures digestion.

9. Never bathe when the body or mind is much exhausted. It is liable to
check the healthful circulation.

10. A good time for bathing is just before retiring. The morning hour is a
good time also, if a warm room and warm water can be secured.

11. Never bathe a fresh wound or broken skin with cold water; the wound
absorbs water, and causes swelling and irritation.

12. A person not robust should be very careful in bathing; great care
should be exercised to avoid any chilling effects.

[Illustration]

{372}

All the Different Kinds of Baths, and How to Prepare Them.

THE SULPHUR BATH.

For the itch, ringworm, itching, and for other slight skin irritations,
bathe in water containing a little sulphur.

THE SALT BATH.

To open the pores of the skin, put a little common salt into the water.
Borax, baking soda or lime used in the same way are excellent for cooling
and cleansing the skin. A very small quantity in a bowl of water is
sufficient.

THE VAPOR BATH.

1. For catarrh, bronchitis, pleurisy, inflammation of the lungs,
rheumatism, fever, affections of the bowels and kidneys, and skin diseases,
the vapor-bath is an excellent remedy.

2. APPARATUS.--Use a small alcohol lamp, and place over it a small dish
containing water. Light the lamp and allow the water to boil. Place a
cane-bottom chair over the lamp, and seat the patient on it. Wrap blankets
or quilts around the chair and around the patient, closing it tightly about
the neck. After free perspiration is produced the patient should be wrapped
in warm blankets, and placed in bed, so as to continue the perspiration for
some time.

3. A convenient alcohol lamp may be made by taking a tin box, placing a
tube in it, and putting in a common lamp wick. Any tinner can make one in a
few minutes, at a trifling cost.

THE HOT-AIR BATH.

1. Place the alcohol lamp under the chair, without the dish of water. Then
place the patient on the chair, as in the vapor bath, and let him remain
until a gentle and free perspiration is produced. This bath may be taken
from time to time, as may be deemed necessary.

2. While remaining in the hot-air bath the patient may drink freely of cold
or tepid water.

3. As soon as the bath is over the patient should be washed with hot water
and soap.

4. The hot-air bath is excellent for colds, skin diseases, and the gout.
{373}

THE SPONGE BATH.

1. Have a large basin of water of the temperature of 88 or 95 degrees. As
soon as the patient rises rub the body over with a soft, dry towel until it
becomes warm.

2. Now sponge the body with water and a little soap, at the same time
keeping the body well covered, except such portions as are necessarily
exposed. Then dry the skin carefully with a soft, warm towel. Rub the skin
well for two or three minutes, until every part becomes red and perfectly
dry.

3. Sulphur, lime or salt, and sometimes mustard, may be used in any of the
sponge baths, according to the disease.

THE FOOT BATH.

1. The foot bath, in coughs, colds, asthma, headaches and fevers, is
excellent. One or two tablespoonfuls of ground mustard added to a gallon of
hot water, is very beneficial.

2. Heat the water as hot as the patient can endure it, and gradually
increase the temperature by pouring in additional quantities of hot water
during the bath.

THE SITZ BATH.

A tub is arranged so that the patient can sit down in it while bathing.
Fill the tub about one-half full of water. This is an excellent remedy for
piles, constipation, headache, gravel, and for acute and inflammatory
affections generally.

THE ACID BATH.

Place a little vinegar in water, and heat to the usual temperature. This is
an excellent remedy for the disorders of the liver.

       *       *       *       *       *

A Sure Cure for Prickly Heat.

1. Prickly heat is caused by hot weather, by excess of flesh, by rough
flannels, by sudden changes of temperature, or by over-fatigue.

2. TREATMENT--Bathe two or three times a day with warm water, in which a
moderate quantity of bran and common soda has been stirred. After wiping
the skin dry, dust the affected parts with common cornstarch.

       *       *       *       *       *


{374}

Digestibility of Food.

  Article of Food.         Condition.       Hours Required.

  Rice                     Boiled            1.00
  Eggs, whipped            Raw               1.30
  Trout, salmon, fresh     Boiled            1.30
  Apples, sweet and
    mellow                 Raw               1.30
  Venison steak            Broiled           1.35
  Tapioca                  Boiled            2.00
  Barley                    "                2.00
  Milk                      "                2.00
  Bullock's liver, fresh   Broiled           2.00
  Fresh eggs               Raw               2.00
  Codfish, cured and
    dry                    Boiled            2.00
  Milk                     Raw               2.15
  Wild turkey              Roasted           2.15
  Domestic turkey           "                2.30
  Goose                     "                2.30
  Sucking pig               "                2.30
  Fresh lamb               Broiled           2.30
  Hash, meat and vegetables   Warmed         2.30
  Beans and pod            Boiled            2.30
  Parsnips                  "                2.30
  Irish potatoes           Roasted           2.30
  Chicken                  Fricassee         2.45
  Custard                  Baked             2.45
  Salt beef                Boiled            2.45
  Sour and hard apples     Raw               2.50
  Fresh oysters             "                2.55
  Fresh eggs               Soft boiled       3.00
  Beef, fresh, lean and
    rare                   Roasted           3.00
  Beef steak               Broiled           3.00
  Pork, recently salted    Stewed            3.00
  Fresh mutton             Boiled            3.00
  Soup, beans               "                3.00
  Soup, chicken             "                3.00
  Apple dumpling            "                3.00
  Fresh oysters            Roasted           3.15
  Pork steak               Broiled           3.15
  Fresh mutton             Roasted           3.15
  Corn bread               Baked             3.15
  Carrots                  Boiled            3.15
  Fresh sausage            Broiled           3.20
  Fresh flounder           Fried             3.30
  Fresh catfish             "                3.30
  Fresh oysters            Stewed            3.30
  Butter                   Melted            3.30
  Old, strong cheese       Raw               3.30
  Mutton soup              Boiled            3.30
  Oyster soup               "                3.30
  Fresh wheat bread        Baked             3.30
  Flat turnips             Boiled            3.30
  Irish potatoes            "                3.30
  Fresh eggs               Hard boiled       3.30
    "    "                 Fried             3.30
  Green corn and beans     Boiled            3.45
  Beets                     "                3.45
  Fresh, lean beef         Fried             4.00
  Fresh veal               Broiled           4.00
  Domestic fowls           Roasted           4.00
  Ducks                     "                4.00
  Beef soup, vegetables
   and bread               Boiled            4.00
  Pork, recently salted     "                4.30
  Fresh veal               Fried             4.30
  Cabbage, with vinegar    Boiled            4.30
  Pork, fat and lean       Roasted           5.30

       *       *       *       *       *


{375}

How to Cook for the Sick.

Useful Dietetic Recipes.

       *       *       *       *       *

GRUELS.

1. OATMEAL GRUEL.--Stir two tablespoonfuls of coarse oatmeal into a quart
of boiling water, and let it simmer two hours. Strain, if preferred.

2. BEEF TEA AND OATMEAL.--Beat two tablespoonfuls of fine oatmeal, with two
tablespoonfuls of cold water until very smooth, then add a pint of hot beef
tea. Boil together six or eight minutes, stirring constantly. Strain
through a fine sieve.

3. MILK GRUEL.--Into a pint of scalding milk stir two tablespoonfuls of
fine oatmeal. Add a pint of boiling water, and boil until the meal is
thoroughly cooked.

4. MILK PORRIDGE.--Place over the fire equal parts of milk and water. Just
before it boils, add a small quantity (a tablespoonful to a pint of water)
of graham flour or cornmeal, previously mixed with water, and boil three
minutes.

5. SAGO GRUEL.--Take two tablespoonfuls of sago and place them in a small
saucepan, moisten gradually with a little cold water. Set the preparation
on a slow fire, and keep stirring till it becomes rather stiff and clear.
Add a little grated nutmeg and sugar to taste; if preferred, half a pat of
butter may also be added with the sugar.

6. CREAM GRUEL.--Put a pint and a half of water on the stove in a saucepan.
Take one tablespoon of flour and the same of cornmeal; mix this with cold
water, and as soon as the water in the saucepan boils, stir it in slowly.
Let it boil slowly about twenty minutes, stirring constantly; then add a
little salt and a gill of sweet cream. Do not let it boil after putting in
the cream, but turn into a bowl and cover tightly. Serve in a pretty cup
and saucer. {376}

DRINKS.

1. APPLE WATER.--Cut two large apples into slices and pour a quart of
boiling water on them, or on roasted apples: strain in two or three hours
and sweeten slightly.

2. ORANGEADE.--Take the thin peel of two oranges and of one lemon; add
water and sugar the same as for hot lemonade. When cold add the juice of
four or five oranges and one lemon and strain off.

3. HOT LEMONADE.--Take two thin slices and the juice of one lemon; mix with
two tablespoonfuls of granulated sugar, and add one-half pint of boiling
water.

4. FLAXSEED LEMONADE.--Two tablespoonfuls of whole flaxseed to a pint of
boiling water, let it steep three hours, strain when cool and add the juice
of two lemons and two tablespoonfuls of honey. If too thick, put in cold
water. Splendid for colds and suppression of urine.

5. JELLY WATER.--Sour jellies dissolved in water make a pleasant drink for
fever patients.

6. TOAST WATER.--Toast several thin pieces of bread a nice deep brown, but
do not blacken or burn. Break into small pieces and put into a jar. Pour
over the pieces a quart of boiling water; cover the jar and let it stand an
hour before using. Strain if desired.

7. WHITE OF EGG AND MILK.--The white of an egg beaten to a stiff froth, and
stirred very quickly into a glass of milk, is a very nourishing food for
persons whose digestion is weak, also for children who cannot digest milk
alone.

8. EGG COCOA.--One-half teaspoon cocoa with enough hot water to make a
paste. Take one egg, beat white and yolk separately. Stir into a cup of
milk heated to nearly boiling. Sweeten if desired. Very nourishing.

9. EGG LEMONADE.--White of one egg, one tablespoonful pulverized sugar,
juice of one lemon and one goblet of water. Beat together. Very grateful in
inflammation of lungs, stomach or bowels.

10. BEEF TEA.--For every quart of tea desired use one pound of fresh beef,
from which all fat, bones and sinews have been carefully removed; cut the
beef into pieces a quarter of an inch thick and mix with a pint of cold
water. Let it stand an hour, then pour into a glass fruit can and place in
a vessel of water; let it heat on the stove another hour, but do not let it
boil. Strain before using. {377}

JELLIES.

1. SAGO JELLY.--Simmer gently in a pint of water two tablespoonfuls of sago
until it thickens, frequently stirring. A little sugar may be added if
desired.

2. CHICKEN JELLY.--Take half a raw chicken, tie in a coarse cloth and
pound, till well mashed, bones and meat together. Place the mass in a
covered dish with water sufficient to cover it well. Allow it to simmer
slowly till the liquor is reduced about one-half and the meat is thoroughly
cooked. Press through a fine sieve or cloth, and salt to taste. Place on
the stove to simmer about five minutes. When cold remove all particles of
grease.

3. MULLED JELLY.--Take one tablespoonful of currant or grape jelly; beat it
with the white of one egg and a little loaf sugar; pour on it one-half pint
of boiling water and break in a slice of dry toast or two crackers.

4. BREAD JELLY.--Pour boiling water over bread crumbs; place the mixture on
the fire and let it boil until it is perfectly smooth. Take it off, and
after pouring off the water, flavor with something agreeable, as a little
raspberry or currant jelly water. Pour into a mold until required for use.

5. LEMON JELLY.--Moisten two tablespoonfuls of cornstarch, stir into one
pint boiling water; add the juice of two lemons and one-half cup of sugar.
Grate in a little of the rind. Put in molds to cool.

MISCELLANEOUS.

1. TO COOK RICE.--Take two cups of rice and one and one-half pints of milk.
Place in a covered dish and steam in a kettle of boiling water until it is
cooked through, pour into cups and let it stand until cold. Serve with
cream.

2. RICE OMELET.--Two cups boiled rice, one cup sweet milk, two eggs. Stir
together with egg beater, and put into a hot buttered skillet. Cook slowly
ten minutes, stirring frequently.

3. BROWNED RICE.--Parch or brown rice slowly. Steep in milk for two hours.
The rice or the milk only is excellent in summer complaint.

4. STEWED OYSTERS.--Take one pint of milk, one cup of water, a teaspoon of
salt: when boiling put in one pint of {378} bulk oysters. Stir occasionally
and remove from the stove before it boils. An oyster should not be
shriveled in cooking.

5. BROILED OYSTERS.--Put large oysters on a wire toaster. Hold over hot
coals until heated through. Serve on toast moistened with cream. Very
grateful in convalescence.

6. OYSTER TOAST.--Pour stewed oysters over graham gems or bread toasted.
Excellent for breakfast.

7. GRAHAM CRISPS.--Mix graham flour and cold water into a very stiff dough.
Knead, roll very thin, and bake quickly in a hot oven. Excellent food for
dyspeptics.

8. APPLE SNOW.--Take seven apples, not very sweet ones, and bake till soft
and brown. Then remove the skins and cores; when cool, beat them smooth and
fine; add one-half cup of granulated sugar and the white of one egg. Beat
till the mixture will hold on your spoon. Serve with soft custard.

9. EGGS ON TOAST.--Soften brown bread toast with hot water, put on a
platter and cover with poached or scrambled eggs.

10. BOILED EGGS.--An egg should never be boiled. Place in boiling water and
set back on the stove for from seven to ten minutes. A little experience
will enable anyone to do it successfully.

11. CRACKED WHEAT PUDDING.--In a deep two-quart pudding dish put layers of
cold, cooked, cracked wheat, and tart apples sliced thin, with four
tablespoonfuls of sugar. Raisins can be added if preferred. Fill the dish,
having the wheat last, add a cup of cold water. Bake two hours.

12. PIE FOR DYSPEPTICS.--Four tablespoonfuls of oatmeal, one pint of water;
let stand for a few hours, or until the meal is swelled. Then add two large
apples, pared and sliced, a little salt, one cup of sugar, one
tablespoonful of flour. Mix all well together and bake in a buttered dish;
makes a most delicious pie, which can be eaten with safety by the sick or
well.

13. APPLE TAPIOCA PUDDING.--Soak a teacup of tapioca in a quart of warm
water three hours. Cut in thin slices six tart apples, stir them lightly
with the tapioca, add half cup sugar. Bake three hours. To be eaten with
whipped cream. Good either warm or cold. {379}

14. GRAHAM MUFFINS.--Take one pint of new milk, one pint graham or entire
wheat flour; stir together and add one beaten egg. Can be baked in any kind
of gem pans or muffin rings. Salt must not be used with any bread that is
made light with egg.

15. STRAWBERRY DESSERT.--Place alternate layers of hot cooked cracked wheat
and strawberries in a deep dish; when cold, turn out on platter; cut in
slices and serve with cream and sugar, or strawberry juice. Wet the molds
with cold water before using. This, molded in small cups, makes a dainty
dish for the sick. Wheatlet can be used in the same way.

16. FRUIT BLANC MANGE.--One quart of juice of strawberries, cherries,
grapes or other juicy fruit; one cup water. When boiling, add two
tablespoonfuls sugar and four tablespoonfuls cornstarch wet in cold water;
let boil five or six minutes, then mold in small cups. Serve without sauce,
or with cream or boiled custard. Lemon juice can be used the same, only
requiring more water. This is a very valuable dish for convalescents and
pregnant women, where the stomach rejects solid food.

[Illustration]

{380}

Save the Girls.

[Illustration: GOOD ADVICE FROM GRANDPA.]

1. PUBLIC BALLS.--The church should turn its face like flint against the
public ball. Its influence is evil, and nothing but evil. It is a well
known fact that in all cities and large towns the ball room is the
recruiting office for prostitution.

2. THOUGHTLESS YOUNG WOMEN.--In cities public balls are given every night,
and many thoughtless young women, {381} mostly the daughters of small
tradesmen and mechanics, or clerks or laborers, are induced to attend "just
for fun." Scarcely one in a hundred of the girls attending these balls
preserve their purity. They meet the most desperate characters,
professional gamblers, criminals and the lowest debauchees. Such an
assembly and such influence cannot mean anything but ruin for an innocent
girl.

3. VILE WOMEN.--The public ball is always a resort of vile women who
picture to innocent girls the ease and luxury of a harlot's life, and offer
them all manner of temptations to abandon the paths of virtue. The public
ball is the resort of the libertine and the adulterer, and whose object is
to work the ruin of every innocent girl that may fall into their clutches.

4. THE QUESTION.--Why does society wonder at the increase of prostitution,
when the public balls and promiscuous dancing is so largely endorsed and
encouraged?

5. WORKING GIRLS.--Thousands of innocent working girls enter innocently and
unsuspectingly into the paths which lead them to the house of evil, or who
wander the streets as miserable outcasts all through the influence of the
dance. The low theatre and dance halls and other places of unselected
gatherings are the milestones which mark the working girl's downward path
from virtue to vice, from modesty to shame.

6. THE SALESWOMAN, the seamstress, the factory girl or any other virtuous
girl had better, far better, die than take the first step in the path of
impropriety and danger. Better, a thousand times better, better for this
life, better for the life to come, an existence of humble, virtuous
industry than a single departure from virtue, even though it were paid with
a fortune.

7. TEMPTATIONS.--There is not a young girl but what is more or less tempted
by some unprincipled wretch who may have the reputation of a genteel
society man. It behooves parents to guard carefully the morals of their
daughters, and be vigilant and cautious in permitting them to accept the
society of young men. Parents who desire to save their daughters from a
fate which is worse than death, should endeavor by every means in their
power to keep them from falling into traps cunningly devised by some
cunning lover. There are many good young men, but not all are safe friends
to an innocent, confiding young girl.

8. PROSTITUTION.--Some girls inherit their vicious tendency; others fall
because of misplaced affections; many sin through a love of dress, which is
fostered by society and {382} by the surroundings amidst which they may be
placed; many, very many, embrace a life of shame to escape poverty. While
each of these different phases of prostitution require a different remedy,
we need better men, better women, better laws and better protection for the
young girls.

[Illustration: A RUSSIAN SPINNING GIRL.]

9. A STARTLING FACT.--Startling as it may seem to some, it is a fact in our
large cities that there are many girls raised {383} by parents with no
other aim than to make them harlots. At a tender age they are sold by
fathers and mothers into an existence which is worse than slavery itself.
It is not uncommon to see girls at the tender age of thirteen or
fourteen--mere children--hardened courtesans, lost to all sense of shame
and decency. They are reared in ignorance, surrounded by demoralizing
influences, cut off from the blessings of church and Sabbath school, see
nothing but licentiousness, intemperance and crime. These young girls are
lost forever. They are beyond the reach of the moralist or preacher and
have no comprehension of modesty and purity. Virtue to them is a stranger,
and has been from the cradle.

10. A GREAT WRONG.--Parents too poor to clothe themselves bring children
into the world, children for whom they have no bread, consequently the girl
easily falls a victim in early womanhood to the heartless libertine. The
boy with no other schooling but that of the streets soon masters all the
qualifications for a professional criminal. If there could be a law
forbidding people to marry who have no visible means of supporting a
family, or if they should marry, if their children could be taken from them
and properly educated by the State, it would cost the country less and be a
great step in advancing our civilization.

11. THE FIRST STEP.--Thousands of fallen women could have been saved from
lives of degradation and deaths of shame had they received more toleration
and loving forgiveness in their first steps of error. Many women naturally
pure and virtuous have fallen to the lowest depths because discarded by
friends, frowned upon by society, and sneered at by the world, after they
had taken a single mis-step. Society forgives man, but woman never.

12. IN THE BEGINNING of every girl's downward career there is necessarily a
hesitation. She naturally ponders over what course to take, dreading to
meet friends and looking into the future with horror. That moment is the
vital turning point in her career; a kind word of forgiveness, a mother's
embrace a father's welcome may save her. The bloodhounds, known as the
seducer, the libertine, the procurer, are upon her track; she is trembling
on the frightful brink of the abyss. Extend a helping hand and save her!

13. FATHER, if your daughter goes astray, do not drive her from your home.
Mother, if your child errs, do not close your heart against her. Sisters
and brothers and friends, do not force her into the pathway of shame, but
rather strive to win her back into the Eden of virtue, and in nine cases
out of ten you will succeed. {384}

14. SOCIETY EVILS.--The dance, the theater, the wine-cup, the race-course,
the idle frivolity and luxury of summer watering places, all have a
tendency to demoralize the young.

15. BAD SOCIETY.--Much of our modern society admits libertines and seducers
to the drawing-room, while it excludes their helpless and degraded victims,
consequently it is not strange that there are skeletons in many closets,
matrimonial infelicity and wayward girls.

16. "'KNOW THYSELF,' says Dr. Saur, "is an important maxim for us all, and
especially is it true for girls.

"All are born with the desire to become attractive--girls especially want
to grow up, not only attractive, but beautiful. Some girls think that
bright eyes, pretty hair and fine clothes alone make them beautiful. This
is not so. Real beauty depends upon good health, good manners and a pure
mind.

"As the happiness of our girls depends upon their health, it behoves us all
to guide the girls in such a way as to bring forward the best of results.

17. "THERE IS NO ONE who stands so near the girl as the mother. From early
childhood she occupies the first place in the little one's confidence--she
laughs, plays, and corrects, when necessary, the faults of her darling. She
should be equally ready to guide in the important laws of life and health
upon which rest her future. Teach your daughters that in all things the
'creative principle' has its source in life itself. It originates from
Divine life, and when they know that it may be consecrated to wise and
useful purposes, they are never apt to grow up with base thoughts or form
bad habits. Their lives become a happiness to themselves and a blessing to
humanity.

18. TEACH WISELY.--"Teach your daughters that _all life_ originates from a
seed--a germ. Knowing this law, you need have no fears that base or
unworthy thoughts of the reproductive function can ever enter their minds.
The growth, development and ripening of human seed becomes a beautiful and
sacred mystery. The tree, the rose and all plant life are equally as
mysterious and beautiful in their reproductive life. Does not this alone
prove to us, conclusively, that there is a Divinity in the background
governing, controlling and influencing our lives? Nature has no secrets,
and why should we? None at all. The only care we should experience is in
teaching wisely. {385}

"Yes--lead them wisely--teach them that the seed, the germ of a new life,
is maturing within them. Teach them that between the ages of eleven and
fourteen this maturing process has certain physical signs. The breasts grow
round and full, the whole body, even the voice, undergoes a change. It is
right that they should be taught the natural law of life in reproduction
and the physiological structure of their being. Again we repeat that these
lessons should be taught by the mother, and in a tender, delicate and
confidential way. Become, oh, mother, your daughter's companion, and she
will not go elsewhere for this knowledge--which must come to all in time,
but possibly too late and through sources that would prove more harm than
good.

19. THE ORGANS OF CREATIVE LIFE in women are: Ovaries, Fallopian tubes,
uterus, vagina and mammary glands. The _ovaries_ and _Fallopian tubes_ have
already been described under "The Female Generative Organs."

"The _uterus_ is a pear-shaped muscular organ, situated in the lower
portion of the pelvis, between the bladder and the rectum. It is less than
three inches in length and two inches in width and one in thickness.

"The _vagina_ is a membranous canal which joins the internal outlet with
the womb, which projects slightly into it. The opening into the vagina is
nearly oval, and in those who have never indulged in sexual intercourse or
in handling the sexual organs is more or less closed by a membrane termed
the _hymen_. The presence of this membrane was formerly considered as
undoubted evidence of virginity; its absence, a lack of chastity.

"The _mammary glands_ are accessory to the generative organs. They secrete
milk, which the All-wise Father provided for the nourishment of the child
after birth.

20. "MENSTRUATION, which appears about the age of thirteen years, is the
flow from the uterus that occurs every month as the seed-germ ripens in the
ovaries. God made the sexual organs so that the race should not die out. He
gave them to us so that we may reproduce life, and thus fill the highest
position in the created universe. The purpose for which they are made is
high and holy and honorable, and if they are used only for this
purpose--and they must not be used at all until they are fully
matured--they will be a source of greatest blessing to us all.

[Illustration: HOPEFUL YOUTH.]

21. "A CAREFUL STUDY of this organ, of its location, of its arteries and
nerves, will convince the growing girl that {387} her body should never
submit to corsets and tight lacing in response to the demands of fashion,
even though nature has so bountifully provided for the safety of this
important organ. By constant pressure the vagina and womb may be compressed
into one-third their natural length or crowded into an unnatural position.
We can readily see, then, the effect of lacing or tight clothing. Under
these circumstances the ligaments lose their elasticity, and as a result we
have prolapsus or falling of the womb.

22. "I AM MORE ANXIOUS for growing girls than for any other earthly object.
These girls are to be the mothers of future generations; upon them hangs
the destiny of the world in coming time, and if they can be made to
understand what is right and what is wrong with regard to their own bodies
now, while they are young, the children they will give birth to and the men
and women who shall call them mother will be of a higher type and belong to
a nobler class than those of the present day.

23. "ALL WOMEN CANNOT have good features, but they can look well, and it is
possible to a great extent to correct deformity and develop much of the
figure. The first step to good looks is good health, and the first element
of health is cleanliness. Keep clean--wash freely, bathe regularly. All the
skin wants is leave to act, and it takes care of itself.

24. "GIRLS SOMETIMES GET THE IDEA that it is nice to be 'weak' and
'delicate,' but they cannot get a more false idea! God meant women to be
strong and able-bodied, and only by being so can they be happy and capable
of imparting happiness to others. It is only by being strong and healthy
that they can be perfect in their sexual nature; and it is only by being
perfect in this part of their being that you can become a noble, grand and
beautiful woman.

25. "UP TO THE AGE of puberty, if the girl has grown naturally, waist, hips
and shoulders are about the same in width, the shoulders being, perhaps, a
trifle the broadest. Up to this time the sexual organs have grown but
little. Now they take a sudden start and need more room. Nature aids the
girls; the tissues and muscles increase in size and the pelvis bones
enlarge. The limbs grow plump, the girl stops growing tall and becomes
round and full. Unsuspected strength comes to her; tasks that were once
hard to perform are now easy; her voice becomes sweeter and stronger. The
mind develops more rapidly even than the body; her brain is more active and
quicker; subjects that once were {388} dull and dry have unwonted interest;
lessons are more easily learned; the eyes sparkle with intelligence,
indicating increased mental power; her manner denotes the consciousness of
new power; toys of childhood are laid away; womanly thoughts and pursuits
fill her mind; budding childhood has become blooming womanhood. Now, if
ever, must be laid the foundation of physical vigor and of a healthy body.
Girls should realize the significance of this fact. Do not get the idea
that men admire a weakly, puny, delicate, small-waisted, languid, doll-like
creature, a libel on true womanhood. Girls admire men with broad chests,
square shoulders, erect form, keen bright eyes, hard muscles and undoubted
vigor. Men also turn naturally to healthy, robust, well-developed girls,
and to win their admiration girls must meet their ideals. A good form, a
sound mind and a healthy body are within the reach of nine out of ten of
our girls by proper care and training. Physical bankruptcy may claim the
same proportion if care and training are neglected.

26. "A WOMAN FIVE FEET TALL should measure two feet around the waist and
thirty-three inches around the hips. A waist less than this proportion
indicates compression either by lacing or tight clothing. Exercise in the
open air, take long walks and vigorous exercise, using care not to overdo
it. Housework will prove a panacea for many of the ills which flesh is heir
to. One hour's exercise at the wash-*tub is of far more value, from a
physical standpoint, than hours at the piano. Boating is most excellent
exercise and within the reach of many. Care in dressing is also important,
and, fortunately, fashion is coming to the rescue here. It is essential
that no garments be suspended from the waist. Let the shoulders bear the
weight of all the clothing, so that the organs of the body may be left free
and unimpeded.

27. "SLEEP SHOULD BE HAD regularly and abundantly. Avoid late hours, undue
excitement, evil associations; partake of plain, nutritious food, and
health will be your reward. There is one way of destroying health, which,
fortunately, is not as common among girls as boys, and which must be
mentioned ere this chapter closes. Self-abuse is practised among growing
girls to such an extent as to arouse serious alarm. Many a girl has been
led to handle and play with her sexual organs through the advice of some
girl who has obtained temporary pleasure in that {389} way; or, perchance,
chafing has been followed by rubbing until the organs have become congested
with blood, and in this accidental manner the girl discovered what seems to
her a source of pleasure, but which, alas, is a source of misery, and even
death.

28. "AS IN THE BOY, SO IN THE GIRL, self-abuse causes an undue amount of
blood to flow to those organs, thus depriving other parts of the body of
its nourishment, the weakest part first showing the effect of want of
sustenance. All that has been said upon this loathsome subject in the
preceding chapter for boys might well be repeated here, but space forbids.
Read that chapter again, and know that the same signs that betray the boy
will make known the girl addicted to the vice. The bloodless lips, the
dull, heavy eye surrounded with dark rings, the nerveless hand, the
blanched cheek, the short breath, the old, faded look, the weakened memory
and silly irritability tell the story all too plainly. The same evil result
follows, ending perhaps in death, or worse, in insanity. Aside from the
injury the girl does herself by yielding to this habit, there is one other
reason which appeals to the conscience, and that is, self-abuse is an
offence against moral law--it is putting to a vile, selfish use the organs
which were given for a high, sacred purpose.

29. "LET THEM ALONE, except to care for them when care is needed, and they
may prove the greatest blessing you have ever known. They were given you
that you might become a mother, the highest office to which God has ever
called one of His creatures. Do not debase yourself and become lower than
the beasts of the field. If this habit has fastened itself upon any one of
our readers, stop it now. Do not allow yourself to think about it, give up
all evil associations, seek pure companions, and go to your mother, older
sister, or physician for advice.

30. "AND YOU, MOTHER, knowing the danger that besets your daughters at this
critical period, are you justified in keeping silent? Can you be held
guiltless if your daughter ruins body and mind because you were _too
modest_ to tell her the laws of her being? There is no love that is dearer
to your daughter than _yours_, no advice that is more respected than
_yours_, no one whose warning would be more potent. Fail not in your duty.
As motherhood has been your sweetest joy, so help your daughter to make it
hers."

       *       *       *       *       *


{390}

Save the Boys.

PLAIN WORDS TO PARENTS.

[Illustration: YOUNG GARFIELD DRIVING TEAM ON THE CANAL.]

1. With a shy look, approaching his mother when she was alone, the boy of
fifteen said, "There are some things I want to ask you. I hear the boys
speak of them at school, and I don't understand, and a fellow doesn't like
to ask any one but his mother."

2. Drawing him down to her, in the darkness that was closing about them,
the mother spoke to her son and the son to his mother freely of things
which everybody must know sooner or later, and which no boy should learn
from "anyone but his mother" or father.

3. If you do not answer such a natural question, your boy will turn for
answer to others, and learn things, perhaps, which your cheeks may well
blush to have him know.

4. Our boys and girls are growing faster than we think. The world moves; we
can no longer put off our children {391} with the old nurses' tales; even
MacDonald's beautiful statement,

 "Out of the everywhere into the there",

does not satisfy them when they reverse his question and ask, "Where did I
come from?"

5. They must be answered. If we put them off, they may be tempted to go
elsewhere for information, and hear half-truths, or whole truths so
distorted, so mingled with what is low and impure that, struggle against it
as they may in later years, their minds will always retain these early
impressions.

6. It is not so hard if you begin early. The very flowers are object
lessons. The wonderful mystery of life is wrapped in one flower, with its
stamens, pistils and ovaries. Every child knows how an egg came in the
nest, and takes it as a matter of course; why not go one step farther with
them and teach the wonder, the beauty, the holiness that surrounds
maternity anywhere? Why, centuries ago the Romans honored, and taught their
boys to honor, the women in whose safety was bound up the future of their
existence as a nation! Why should we do less?

7. Your sons and mine, your daughters and mine, need to be wisely taught
and guarded just along these lines, if your sons and mine, your daughters
and mine, are to grow up into a pure, healthy, Christian manhood and
womanhood.

[Illustration]

{392} 8. [4]"How grand is the boy who has kept himself undefiled! His
complexion clear, his muscles firm, his movements vigorous, his manner
frank, his courage undaunted, his brain active, his will firm, his
self-control perfect, his body and mind unfolding day by day. His life
should be one song of praise and thanksgiving. If you want your boy to be
such a one, train him, my dear woman, _to-day_, and his _to-morrow_ will
take care of itself.

9. "Think you that good seed sown will bring forth bitter fruit? A thousand
times, No! As we sow, so shall we reap. Train your boys in morality,
temperance and virtue. Teach them to embrace good and shun evil. Teach them
the true from the false; the light from the dark. Teach them that when they
take a thing that is not their own, they commit a sin. Teach them that _sin
means disobedience of God's laws of every kind_.

10. "God made every organ of our body with the intention that it should
perform a certain work. If we wish to see, we use our eyes; if we want to
hear, our ears are called into use. In fact, nature teaches us the proper
use of _all our organs_. I say to you, mother, and oh, so earnestly: 'Go
teach your boy that which you may never be ashamed to do, about these
organs that make him _specially a boy_.'

11. "Teach him they are called _sexual organs_; that they are not impure,
but of special importance, and made by God for a definite purpose. Teach
him that there are impurities taken from the system in fluid form called
urine, and that it passes through the sexual organs, but that nature takes
care of that. Teach him that these organs are given as a sacred trust, that
in maturer years he may be the means of giving life to those who shall live
forever.

12. "Impress upon him that if these organs are abused, or if they are put
to any use besides that for which God made them--and He did not intend they
should be used at all until man is fully grown--they will bring disease and
ruin upon those who abuse and disobey the laws which God has made to govern
them. If he has ever learned to handle his _sexual organs_, or to touch
them in any way except to keep them clean, not to do it again. If he does
he will not grow up happy, healthy and strong.

13. "Teach him that when he handles or excites the {393} sexual organs all
parts of the body suffer, because they are connected by nerves that run
throughout the system; this is why it is called 'self-abuse.' The whole
body is abused when this part of the body is handled or excited in any
manner whatever. Teach them to shun all children who indulge in this
loathsome habit, or all children who talk about these things. The sin is
terrible, and is, in fact, worse than lying or stealing. For, although
these are wicked and will ruin their souls, yet this habit of self-abuse
will ruin both soul and body.

14. "If the sexual organs are handled, it brings too much blood to these
parts, and this produces a diseased condition; it also causes disease in
other organs of the body, because they are left with a less amount of blood
than they ought to have. The sexual organs, too, are very closely connected
with the spine and the brain by means of the nerves, and if they are
handled, or if you keep thinking about them, these nerves get excited and
become exhausted, and this makes the back ache, the brain heavy and the
whole body weak.

15. "It lays the foundation for consumption, paralysis and heart disease.
It weakens the memory, makes a boy careless, negligent and listless. It
even makes many lose their minds; others, when grown, commit suicide. How
often mothers see their little boys handling themselves, and let it pass,
because they think the boy will outgrow the habit, and do not realize the
strong hold it has upon them. I say to you who love your boys--'Watch!'

16. "Don't think it does no harm to your boy because he does not suffer
now, for the effects of this vice come on so slowly that the victim is
often very near death before you realize that he has done himself harm. The
boy with no knowledge of the consequences, and with no one to warn him,
finds momentary pleasure in its practice, and so contracts a habit which
grows upon him, undermining his health, poisoning his mind, arresting his
development, and laying the foundation for future misery.

17. "Do not read this book and forget it, for it contains earnest and
living truths. Do not let false modesty stand in your way, but from this
time on keep this thought in mind--'the saving of your boy.' Follow its
teachings and you will bless God as long as you live. Read it to your
neighbors, who, like yourself, have growing boys, and urge them for the
sake of humanity to heed its advice. {394}

18. "Right here we want to emphasize the importance of _cleanliness_. We
verily believe that oftentimes these habits originate in a burning and
irritating sensation about the organs, caused by a want of thorough
washing.

19. "It is worthy of note that many eminent physicians now advocate the
custom of circumcision, claiming that the removal of a little of the
foreskin induces cleanliness, thus preventing the irritation and excitement
which come from the gathering of the whiteish matter under the foreskin at
the beginning of the glands. This irritation being removed, the boy is less
apt to tamper with his sexual organs. The argument seems a good one,
especially when we call to mind the high physical state of those people who
have practiced the custom.

20. "Happy is the mother who can feel she has done her duty, in this
direction, while her boy is still a child. For those mothers, though, whose
little boys have now grown to boyhood with the evil still upon them, and
_you_, through ignorance, permitted it, we would say, 'Begin at once; it is
never too late.' If he has not lost all will power, he can be saved. Let
him go in confidence to a reputable physician and follow his advice. Simple
diet, plentiful exercise in open air and congenial employment will do much.
Do not let the mind dwell upon evil thoughts, shun evil companions, avoid
vulgar stories, sensational novels, and keep the thoughts pure.

21. "Let him interest himself in social and benevolent affairs, participate
in Sunday-school work, farmers' clubs, or any organizations which tend to
elevate and inspire noble sentiment. Let us remember that 'a perfect man is
the noblest work of God.' God has given us a life which is to last forever,
and the little time we spend on earth is as nothing to the ages which we
are to spend in the world beyond; so our earthly life is a very important
part of our existence, for it is here that the foundation is laid for
either happiness or misery in the future. It is here that we decide our
destiny, and our efforts to know and obey God's laws in our bodies as well
as in our souls will not only bring blessings to us in this life, but
never-ending happiness throughout eternity."

22. A QUESTION.--How can a father chew and smoke tobacco, drink and swear,
use vulgar language, tell obscene stories, and raise a family of pure,
clean-minded children? LET THE ECHO ANSWER.

       *       *       *       *       *


{396}

The Inhumanities of Parents.

[Illustration: AN OLD ADAGE: "HE WHO LOVES CHILDREN WILL DO YOU NO HARM."]

1. Not long ago a Presbyterian minister in Western New York whipped his
three-year-old boy to death for refusing to say his prayers. The little
fingers were broken; the tender flesh was bruised and actually mangled;
strong men wept when they looked on the lifeless body. Think of a strong
man from one hundred and fifty to two hundred pounds in weight, pouncing
upon a little child, like a Tiger upon a Lamb, and with his strong arm
inflicting physical blows on the delicate tissues of a child's body. See
its frail and trembling flesh quiver and its tender nervous organization
shaking with terror and fear.

2. How often is this the case in the punishment of children all over this
broad land! Death is not often the immediate consequence of this brutality
as in the above stated case, but the punishment is often as unjust, and the
physical constitution of children is often ruined and the mind by fright
seriously injured.

3. Everyone knows the sudden sense of pain, and sometimes dizziness and
nausea follow, as the results of an accidental hitting of the ankle, knee
or elbow against a hard substance, and involuntary tears are brought to the
eyes; but what is such a pain as this compared with the pains of a dozen or
more quick blows on the body of a little helpless child from the strong arm
of a parent in a passion? Add to this overwhelming terror of fright, the
strangulating effects of sighing and shrieking, and you have a complete
picture of child-torture.

4. Who has not often seen a child receive, within an hour or two of the
first whipping, a second one, for some small ebullition of nervous
irritability, which was simply inevitable from its spent and worn
condition?

5. Would not all mankind cry out at the inhumanity of one who, as things
are to-day, should propose the substitution of pricking or cutting or
burning for whipping? It would, however, be easy to show that small jabs or
pricks or cuts are more human than the blows many children receive. Why may
not lying be as legitimately cured by blisters made with hot coals as by
black and blue spots made with a ruler or whip? The principle is the same;
and if the principle is right, why not multiply methods?

6. How many loving mothers will, without any thought of cruelty, inflict
half a dozen quick blows on the little hand of her child, and when she
could no more take a pin and make {397} the same number of thrusts into the
tender flesh, than she could bind the baby on a rack. Yet the pin-thrust
would hurt far less, and would probably make a deeper impression on the
child's mind.

[Illustration]

7. We do not intend to be understood that a child must have everything that
it desires and every whim and wish to receive special recognition by the
parents. Children can soon be made to understand the necessity of
obedience, and punishment can easily be brought about by teaching them
self-denial. Deny them the use of a certain plaything, deny {398} them the
privilege of visiting certain of their little friends, deny them the
privilege of the table, etc., and these self-denials can be applied
according to the age and condition of the child, with firmness and without
any yielding. Children will soon learn obedience if they see the parents
are sincere. Lessons of home government can be learned by the children at
home as well as they can learn lessons at school.

8. The trouble is, many parents need more government, more training and
more discipline than the little ones under their control.

9. Scores of times during the day a child is told in a short, authoritative
way to do or not to do certain little things, which we ask at the hands of
elder persons as favors. When we speak to an elder person, we say, would
you be so kind as to close the door, when the same person making the
request of a child will say, "_Shut the door._" "_Bring me the chair._"
"_Stop that noise._" "_Sit down there._" Whereas, if the same kindness was
used towards the child it would soon learn to imitate the example.

10. On the other hand, let a child ask for anything without saying
"please," receive anything without saying "thank you," it suffers a rebuke
and a look of scorn at once. Often a child insists on having a book, chair
or apple to the inconveniencing of an elder, and what an outcry is raised:
"Such rudeness;" "Such an ill-mannered child;" "His parents must have
neglected him strangely." Not at all: The parents may have been steadily
telling him a great many times every day not to do these precise things
which you dislike. But they themselves have been all the time doing those
very things before him, and there is no proverb that strikes a truer
balance between two things than the old one which weighs example over
against precept.

11. It is a bad policy to be rude to children. A child will win and be won,
and in a long run the chances are that the child will have better manners
than its parents. Give them a good example and take pains in teaching them
lessons of obedience and propriety, and there will be little difficulty in
raising a family of beautiful and well-behaved children.

12. Never correct a child in the presence of others; it is a rudeness to
the child that will soon destroy its self-respect. It is the way criminals
are made and should always and everywhere be condemned.

13. But there are no words to say what we are or what we deserve, if we do
this to the little children whom we {399} have dared for our own pleasure
to bring into the perils of this life, and whose whole future may be
blighted by the mistakes of our careless hands. There are thousands of
young men and women to-day groaning under the penalties and burdens of
life, who owe their misfortunes, their shipwreck and ruin to the ignorance
or indifference of parents.

14. Parents of course love their children, but with that love there is a
responsibility that cannot be shirked. The government and training of
children is a study that demands a parent's time and attention often much
more than the claims of business.

15. Parents, study the problems that come up every day in your home.
Remember, your future happiness, and the future welfare of your children,
depend upon it.

16. CRIMINALS AND HEREDITY.--Wm. M. F. Round was for many years in charge
of the House of Refuge on Randall's Island, New York, and his opportunities
for observation in the work among criminals surely make him a competent
judge, and he says in his letter to the New York Observer: "Among this
large number of young offenders I can state with entire confidence that not
one per cent. were children born of criminal parents; and with equal
confidence I am able to say that the common cause of their delinquency was
found in bad parental training, in bad companionship, and in lack of
wholesome restraint from evil associations and influences. It was this
knowledge that led to the establishing of the House of Refuge nearly
three-quarters of a century ago."

17. BAD TRAINING.--Thus it is seen from one of the best authorities in the
United States that criminals are made either by the indifference or the
neglect of parents, or both, or by too much training without proper
judgment and knowledge. Give your children a good example, and never tell a
child to do something and then become indifferent as to whether they do it
or not. A child should never be told twice to do the same thing. Teach the
child in childhood obedience and never vary from that rule. Do it kindly
but firmly.

18. IF YOUR CHILDREN DO NOT OBEY OR RESPECT YOU in their childhood and
youth, how can you expect to govern them when older and shape their
character for future usefulness and good citizenship?

19. THE FUNDAMENTAL RULE.--Never tell a child twice to do the same thing.
Command the respect of your children, and there will be no question as to
obedience.

       *       *       *       *       *


{400}

Chastity and Purity of Character.

1. CHASTITY is the purest and brightest jewel in human character. Dr.
Pierce in his widely known _Medical Adviser_ says: For the full and perfect
development of mankind, both mental and physical, chastity is necessary.
The health demands abstinence from unlawful intercourse. Therefore children
should be instructed to avoid all impure works of fiction, which tend to
inflame the mind and excite the passions. Only in total abstinence from
illicit pleasures is there safety, morals, and health, while integrity,
peace and happiness are the conscious rewards of virtue. Impurity travels
downward with intemperance, obscenity and corrupting diseases, to
degradation and death. A dissolute, licentious, free-and-easy life is
filled with the dregs of human suffering, iniquity and despair. The
penalties which follow a violation of the law of chastity are found to be
severe and swiftly retributive.

[Illustration]

2. THE UNION of the sexes in holy Matrimony is a law of nature, finding
sanction in both morals and legislation. Even some of the lower animals
unite in this union for life and instinctively observe the law of conjugal
fidelity with a consistency which might put to blush other animals more
highly endowed. It seems important to discuss this subject and understand
our social evils, as well as the intense passional desires of the sexes,
which must be controlled, or they lead to ruin.

3. SEXUAL PROPENSITIES are possessed by all, and these must be held in
abeyance, until they are needed for legitimate purposes. Hence parents
ought to understand the value to their children of mental and physical
labor, to elevate and strengthen the intellectual and moral faculties, to
develop the muscular system and direct the energies of the blood into
healthful channels. Vigorous employment of mind and body engrosses the
vital energies and diverts them from undue excitement of the sexual
desires.

_Give your young people plenty of outdoor amusement; less of dancing and
more of croquet and lawn tennis. Stimulate the methods of pure thoughts in
innocent amusement, and your sons and daughters will mature to manhood and
womanhood pure and chaste in character._ {401}

4. IGNORANCE DOES NOT MEAN INNOCENCE.--It is a current idea, especially
among our good common people, that the child should be kept in ignorance
regarding the mystery of his own body and how he was created or came into
the world. This is a great mistake. Parents must know that the sources of
social impurity are great, and the child is a hundred times more liable to
have his young mind poisoned if entirely ignorant of the functions of his
nature than if judiciously enlightened on these important truths by the
parent. The parent must give him weapons of defense against the putrid
corruption he is sure to meet outside the parental roof. The child cannot
get through the A, B, C period of school without it.

5. CONFLICTING VIEWS.--There is a great difference of opinion regarding the
age at which the child should be taught the mysteries of nature: some
maintain that he cannot comprehend the subject before the age of puberty;
others say "they will find it out soon enough, it is not best to have them
over-wise while they are so young. Wait a while." That is just the point
(_they will find it out_), and we ask in all candor, is it not better that
they learn it from the pure loving mother, untarnished from any insinuating
remark, than that they should learn it from some foul-mouthed libertine on
the street, or some giddy girl at school? Mothers! fathers! which think you
is the most sensible and fraught with the least danger to your darling boy
or girl?

6. DELAY IS FRAUGHT WITH DANGER.--Knowledge on a subject so vitally
connected with moral health must not be deferred. It is safe to say that no
child, no boy at least in these days of excitement and unrest, reaches the
age of ten years without getting some idea of nature's laws regarding
parenthood. And ninety-nine chances to one, those ideas will be vile and
pernicious unless they come from a wise, loving and pure parent. Now, we
entreat you, parents, mothers! do not wait; begin before a false notion has
had chance to find lodgment in the childish mind. But remember this is a
lesson of life, it cannot be told in one chapter; it is as important as the
lessons of love and duty.

7. THE FIRST LESSONS.--Should you be asked by your four or five-year old,
"Mamma, where did you get me?" Instead of saying, "The doctor brought you,"
or "God made you and a stork brought you from Babyland on his back," tell
him the truth as you would about any ordinary question. One mother's
explanation was something like this: "My dear, you were not made any more
than apples are made, or the little chickens are made. Your dolly was {402}
made, but it has no life like you have. God has provided that all living
things such as plants, trees, little chickens, little kittens, little
babies, etc., should grow from seeds or little tiny eggs. Apples grow,
little chickens grow, little babies grow. Apple and peach trees grow from
seeds that are planted in the ground, and the apples and peaches grow on
the trees. Baby chickens grow inside the eggs that are kept warm by the
mother hen for a certain time. Baby boys and girls do not grow inside an
egg, but they start to grow inside of a snug warm nest, from an egg that is
so small you cannot see it with just your eye." This was not given at once,
but from time to time as the child asked questions and in the simplest
language, with many illustrations from plant and animal life. It may have
occupied months, but in time the lesson was fully understood.

8. THE SECOND LESSON.--The second lesson came with the question, "But
_where_ is the nest?" The ice is now broken, as it were; it was an easy
matter for the mother to say, "The nest in which you grew, dear, was close
to your mother's heart inside her body. All things that do not grow inside
the egg itself, and which are kept warm by the mother's body, begin to grow
from the egg in a nest inside the mother's body." It may be that this
mother had access to illustrations of the babe in the womb which were shown
and explained to the child, a boy. He was pleased and satisfied with the
explanations. It meant nothing out of the ordinary any more than a primary
lesson on the circulatory system did, it was knowledge on nature in its
purity and simplicity taught by mother, and hence caused no surprise. The
subject of the male and female generative organs came later; the greatest
pains and care was taken to make it clear, the little boy was taught that
the _sexual organs_ were made for a high and holy purpose, that their
office at present is only to carry off impurities from the system in the
fluid form called urine, and that he must never handle his _sexual organs_
nor touch them in any way except to keep them clean, and if he does this,
he will grow up a bright, happy and healthy boy. But if he excites or
_abuses_ them, he will become puny, sickly and unhappy. All this was
explained in language pure and simple. There is now in the boy a sturdy
base of character building along the line of virtue and purity through
knowledge.

9. SILLY DIRTY TRASH.--But I hear some mother say "Such silly dirty trash
to tell a child!" It is not dirty nor silly; it is nature's untarnished
truth. God has ordained that children should thus be brought into the
world, do you call the works of God silly? Remember, kind mother, and {403}
don't forget it, if you fail to teach your children, boys or girls, these
important lessons early in life, they will learn them from other sources,
perhaps long ere you dream of it, and ninety-nine times out of one hundred
they will get improper, perverted, impure and vile ideas of these important
truths; besides you have lost their confidence and you will never regain it
in these matters. They will never come to mamma for information on these
subjects. And, think you, that your son and daughter, later in life will
make you their confidant as they ought? Will your beautiful daughter hand
the first letters she receives from her lover to mamma to read, and seek
her counsel and advice when she replies to them? Will she ask mamma whether
it is ever proper to sit in her lover's lap? I think not; you have blighted
her confidence and alienated her affections. You have kept knowledge from
her that she had a right to know; you even failed to teach her the
important truths of menstruation. Troubled and excited at the first
menstrual flow, she dashed her feet in cold water hoping to stop the flow.
You know the results--she is now twenty-five but is suffering from it to
this day. You, her mother, over fastidious, _so very nice_ you would never
mention "_such silly trash_," but by your consummate foolishness and mock
modesty you have ruined your daughter's health, and though in later years
she may forgive you, yet she can never love and respect you as she ought.

10. "KNOWLEDGE THE PRESERVER OF PURITY."--Laura E. Scammon, writing on this
subject, in the _Arena_ of November, 1893, says: "When questions arise that
can not be answered by observation, reply to each as simply and directly as
you answer questions upon other subjects, giving scientific names and
facts, and such explanations as are suited to the comprehension of the
child. Treat nature and her laws always with serious, respectful attention.
Treat the holy mysteries of parenthood reverently, never losing sight of
the great law upon which are founded all others--the law of love. Say it
and sing it, play it and pray it into the soul of your child, that _love is
lord of all_."

11. CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE MATTER.--Observation and common sense should
teach every parent that lack of knowledge on these subjects and proper
counsel and advice in later years is the main cause of so many charming
girls being seduced and led astray, and so many bright promising boys
wrecked by _self-abuse_ or _social impurity_. Make your children your
confidants early in life, especially in these things, have frequent talks
with them on nature, and you will never, other things being equal, mourn
over a ruined daughter or a wreckless, debased son.

       *       *       *       *       *


{404}

Exciting the Passions in Children.

1. CONVERSATION BEFORE CHILDREN.--The conduct and conversation of adults
before children and youth, how often have I blushed with shame, and kindled
with indignation at the conversation of parents, and especially of mothers,
to their children: "John, go and kiss Harriet, for she is your
sweet-heart." Well may shame make him hesitate and hang his head. "Why,
John, I did not think you so great a coward. Afraid of the girls, are you?
That will never do. Come, go along, and hug and kiss her. There, that's a
man. I guess you will love the girls yet." Continually is he teased about
the girls and being in love, till he really selects a sweet-heart.

2. THE LOSS OF MAIDEN PURITY AND NATURAL DELICACY.--I will not lift the
veil, nor expose the conduct of children among themselves. And all this
because adults have filled their heads with those impurities which surfeit
their own. What could more effectually wear off that natural delicacy, that
maiden purity and bashfulness, which form the main barriers against the
influx of vitiated Amativeness? How often do those whose modesty has been
worn smooth, even take pleasure in thus saying and doing things to raise
the blush on the cheek of youth and innocence, merely to witness the effect
of this improper illusion upon them; little realizing that they are thereby
breaking down the barriers of their virtue, and prematurely kindling the
fires of animal passion!

3. BALLS, PARTIES AND AMUSEMENTS.--The entire machinery of balls and
parties, of dances and other amusements of young people, tend to excite and
inflame this passion. Thinking it a fine thing to get in love, they court
and form attachments long before either their mental or physical powers are
matured. Of course, these young loves, these green-house exotics, must be
broken off, and their miserable subjects left burning up with the fierce
fires of a flaming passion, which, if left alone, would have slumbered on
for years, till they were prepared for its proper management and exercise.

4. SOWING THE SEEDS FOR FUTURE RUIN.--Nor is it merely the conversation of
adults that does all this mischief; their manners also increase it. Young
men take the hands of girls from six to thirteen years old, kiss them,
press them, and play with them so as, in a great variety of ways, to excite
their innocent passions, combined, I grant, with friendship and
refinement--for all this is genteely done. They {405} intend no harm, and
parents dream of none: and yet their embryo love is awakened, to be again
still more easily excited. Maiden ladies, and even married women, often
express similar feelings towards lads, not perhaps positively improper in
themselves, yet injurious in their ultimate effects.

5. READING NOVELS.--How often have I seen girls not twelve years old, as
hungry for a story or novel as they should be for their dinners! A sickly
sentimentalism is thus formed, and their minds are sullied with impure
desires. Every fashionable young lady must of course read every new novel,
though nearly all of them contain exceptionable allusions, perhaps
delicately covered over with a thin gauze of fashionable refinement; yet,
on that very account, the more objectionable. If this work contained one
improper allusion to their ten, many of those fastidious ladies who now
eagerly devour the vulgarities of Dumas, and the double-entendres of
Bulwer, and even converse with gentlemen about their contents, would
discountenance or condemn it as improper. _Shame on novel-reading women_;
for they cannot have pure minds or unsullied feelings but Cupid and the
beaux, and waking of dreams of love, are fast consuming their health and
virtue.

6. THEATER-GOING.--Theaters and theatrical dancing, also inflame the
passions, and are "the wide gate" of "the broad road" of moral impurity.
Fashionable music is another, especially the verses set to it, being mostly
love-sick ditties, or sentimental odes, breathing this tender passion in
its most melting and bewitching strains. Improper prints often do immense
injury in this respect, as do also balls, parties, annuals, newspaper
articles, exceptional works, etc.

7. THE CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE MATTER.--Stop for one moment and think for
yourself and you will be convinced that the sentiment herein announced is
for your good and the benefit of all mankind.

[Illustration]

{406}

Puberty, Virility and Hygienic Laws.

[Illustration]

1. WHAT IS PUBERTY?--The definition is explained in another portion of this
book, but it should be understood that it is not a prompt or immediate
change; it is a slow extending growth and may extend for many years. The
ripening of physical powers do not take place when the first signs of
puberty appear.

2. PROPER AGE.--The proper age for puberty should vary from twelve to
eighteen years. As a general rule, in the more vigorous and the more
addicted to athletic exercise or out-door life, this change is slower in
making its approach.

3. HYGIENIC ATTENTION.--Youths at this period should receive special
private attention. They should be taught the purpose of the sexual organs
and the proper hygienic laws that govern them, and they should also be
taught to rise in the morning and not to lie in bed after waking up,
because it is largely owing to this habit that the secret vice is
contracted. One of the common causes of premature excitement in many boys
is a tight foreskin. It may cause much evil and ought always to be
remedied. Ill-fitting garments often cause much irritation in children and
produce unnatural passions. It is best to have boys sleep in separate beds
and not have them sleep together if it can be avoided. {407}

4. PROPER INFLUENCE.--Every boy and girl should be carefully trained to
look with disgust on everything that is indecent in word or action. Let
them be taught a sense of shame in doing shameful things, and teach them
that modesty is honorable, and that immodesty is indecent and dishonorable.
Careful training at the proper age may save many a boy or girl from ruin.

5. SEXUAL PASSIONS.--The sexual passions may be a fire from heaven, or a
subtle flame from hell. It depends upon the government and proper control.
The noblest and most unselfish emotions take their arise in the passion of
sex. Its sweet influence, its elevating ties, its vibrations and harmony,
all combine to make up the noble and courageous traits of man.

6. WHEN PASSIONS BEGIN.--It is thought by some that passions begin at the
age of puberty, but the passions may be produced as early as five or ten
years. All depends upon the training or the want of it. Self-abuse is not
an uncommon evil at the age of eight or ten. A company of bad boys often
teach an innocent child that which will develop his ruin. A boy may feel a
sense of pleasure at eight and produce a slight discharge, but not of
semen. Thus it is seen that parents may by neglect do their child the
greatest injury.

7. FALSE MODESTY.--Let there be no false modesty on part of the parents.
Give the child the necessary advice and instructions as soon as necessary.

8. THE MAN UNSEXED, by Mutilation or Masturbation. Eunuchs are proverbial
for their cruelty and crafty and unsympathizing dispositions. Their mental
powers are feeble and their physical strength is inferior. They lack
courage and physical endurance. When a child is operated upon before the
age of puberty, the voice retains its childish treble, the limbs their soft
and rounded outlines, and the neck acquires a feminine fulness; no beard
makes its appearance. In ancient times and up to this time in Oriental
nations eunuchs are found. They are generally slaves who have suffered
mutilation at a tender age. It is a scientific fact that where boys have
been taught the practice of masturbation in their early years, say from
eight to fourteen years of age, if they survive at all they often have
their powers reduced to a similar condition of a eunuch. They generally
however suffer a greater disadvantage. Their health will be more or less
injured. In the eunuch the power of sexual intercourse is not entirely lost
but of course there is sterility and little if any satisfaction, and the
same thing may be true of the victim of self-abuse. {408}

9. SIGNS OF VIRILITY.--As the young man develops in strength and years the
sexual appetite will manifest itself. The secretion of the male known as
the seed or semen depends for the life-transmitting power upon little
minute bodies called spermatozoa. These are very active and numerous in a
healthy secretion, being many hundreds in a single drop and a single one of
them is capable to bring about conception in a female. Dr. Napheys in his
"Transmission of Life," says: "The secreted fluid has been frozen and kept
at a temperature of zero for four days, yet when it was thawed these
animalcules, as they are supposed to be, were as active as ever. They are
not, however, always present, and when present may be of variable activity.
In young men, just past puberty, and in aged men, they are often scarce and
languid in motion." At the proper age the secretion is supposed to be the
most active, generally at the age of twenty-five, and decreases as age
increases.

10. HYGIENIC RULE.--The man at mid-life should guard carefully his passions
and the husband his virile powers, and as the years progress, steadily wean
himself more from his desire, for his passions will become weaker with age
and any excitement in middle life may soon debilitate and destroy his
virile powers.

11. FOLLIES OF YOUTH.--Dr. Napheys says: "Not many men can fritter away a
decade or two of years in dissipation and excess, and ever hope to make up
their losses by rigid surveillance in later years." "The sins of youth are
expiated in age," is a proverb which daily examples illustrate. In
proportion as puberty is precocious, will decadence be premature; the
excesses of middle life draw heavily on the fortune of later years. "The
mill of the gods grinds slow, but it grinds exceedingly fine," and though
nature may be a tardy creditor, she is found at last to be an inexorable
one.

       *       *       *       *       *


{409}

Our Secret Sins.

1. PASSIONS.--Every healthful man has sexual desires, and he might as well
refuse to satisfy his hunger as to deny their existence. The Creator has
given us various appetites, intended they should be indulged, and has
provided the means.

2. REASON.--While it is true that a healthy man has strongly developed
sexual passions, yet, God has crowned man with reason, and with a proper
exercise of this wonderful faculty of the human mind no lascivious thoughts
need to control the passions. A pure heart will develop pure thoughts and
bring out a good life.

3. RIOTING IN VISIONS.--Dr. Lewis says: "Rioting in visions of nude women
may exhaust one as much as an excess in actual intercourse. There are
multitudes who would never spend the night with an abandoned female, but
who rarely meet a young girl that their imaginations are not busy with her
person. This species of indulgence is well-nigh universal; and it is the
source of all other forms--the fountain from which the external vices
spring, and the nursery of masturbation."

4. COMMITTING ADULTERY IN THE HEART.--A young man who allows his mind to
dwell upon the vision of nude women will soon become a victim of ruinous
passion, and either fall under the influence of lewd women or resort to
self-abuse. The man who has no control over his mind and allows impure
thoughts to be associated with the name of every female that may be
suggested to his mind, is but committing adultery in his heart, just as
guilty at heart as though he had committed the deed.

5. UNCHASTITY.--So far as the record is preserved, unchastity has
contributed above all other causes, more to the ruin and exhaustion and
demoralization of the race than all other wickedness. And we shall not be
likely to vanquish the monster, even in ourselves, unless we make the
thoughts our point of attack. So long as they are sensual we are indulging
in sexual abuse, and are almost sure, when temptation is presented, to
commit the overt acts of sin. If we cannot succeed within, we may pray in
vain for help to resist the tempter outwardly. A young man who will indulge
in obscene language will be guilty of a worse deed if opportunity is
offered.

6. BAD DRESSING.--If women knew how much mischief they do men they would
change some of their habits of {410} dress. The dress of their busts, the
padding in different parts, are so contrived as to call away attention from
the soul and fix it on the bosom and hips. And then, many, even educated
women, are careful to avoid serious subjects in our presence--one minute
before a gentleman enters the room they may be engaged in thoughtful
discussion, but the moment he appears their whole style changes; they
assume light fascinating ways, laugh sweet little bits of laughs, and turn
their heads this way and that, all which forbids serious thinking and gives
men over to imagination.

7. THE LUSTFUL EYE.--How many men there are who lecherously stare at every
woman in whose presence they happen to be. These monsters stare at women as
though they were naked in a cage on exhibition. A man whose whole manner is
full of animal passion is not worthy of the respect of refined women. They
have no thoughts, no ideas, no sentiments, nothing to interest them but the
bodies of women whom they behold. The moral character of young women has no
significance or weight in their eyes. This kind of men are a curse to
society and a danger to the community. No young lady is safe in their
company.

8. REBUKING SENSUALISM.--If the young women would exercise an honorable
independence and heap contempt upon the young men that allow their
imagination to take such liberties, a different state of things would soon
follow. Men of that type of character should have no recognition in the
presence of ladies.

9. EARLY MARRIAGES.--There can be no doubt that early marriages are bad for
both parties. For children of such a marriage always lack vitality. The
ancient Germans did not marry until the twenty-fourth or twenty-fifth year,
previous to which they observed the most rigid chastity, and in consequence
they acquired a size and strength that excited the astonishment of Europe.
The present incomparable vigor of that race, both physically and mentally,
is due in a great measure to their long established aversion to marrying
young. The results of too early marriages are in brief, stunted growth and
impaired strength on the part of the male; delicate if not utterly bad
health in the female; the premature old age or death of one or both, and a
puny, sickly offspring.

10. SIGNS OF EXCESSES.--Dr. Dio Lewis says: "Some of the most common
effects of sexual excess are backache, lassitude, giddiness, dimness of
sight, noises in the ears, numbness of the fingers, and paralysis. The
drain is universal, but the more sensitive organs and tissues suffer {411}
most. So the nervous system gives way and continues the principal sufferer
throughout. A large part of the premature loss of sight and hearing,
dizziness, numbness and pricking in the hands and feet, and other kindred
developments, are justly chargeable to unbridled venery. Not unfrequently
you see men whose head or back or nerve testifies of such reckless
expenditure."

11. NON-COMPLETED INTERCOURSE.--Withdrawal before the emission occurs is
injurious to both parties. The soiling of the conjugal bed by the shameful
manoeuvres is to be deplored.

12. THE EXTENT OF THE PRACTICE.--One cannot tell to what extent this vice
is practiced, except by observing its consequences, even among people who
fear to commit the slightest sin, to such a degree is the public conscience
perverted upon this point. Still, many husbands know that nature often
renders nugatory the most subtle calculations, and reconquers the rights
which they have striven to frustrate. No matter; they persevere none the
less, and by the force of habit they poison the most blissful moments of
life, with no surety of averting the result that they fear. So who knows if
the too often feeble and weakened infants are not the fruit of these in
themselves incomplete procreations, and disturbed by preoccupations foreign
to the natural act.

13. HEALTH OF WOMEN.--Furthermore, the moral relations existing between the
married couple undergo unfortunate changes; this affection, founded upon
reciprocal esteem, is little by little effaced by the repetition of an act
which pollutes the marriage bed. If the good harmony of families and the
reciprocal relations are seriously menaced by the invasion of these
detestable practices, the health of women, as we have already intimated, is
fearfully injured.

14. THE PRACTICE OF ABORTION.--Then we have the practice of abortion
reduced in modern times to a science, and almost to a distinct profession.
A large part of the business is carried on by the means of medicines
advertised in obscure but intelligible terms as embryo-destroyers or
preventives of conception. Every large city has its professional
abortionist. Many ordinary physicians destroy embryos to order, and the
skill to do this terrible deed has even descended among the common people.

15. SEXUAL EXHAUSTION.--Every sexual excitement is exhaustive in proportion
to its intensity and continuance. If a man sits by the side of a woman,
fondles and kisses her three or four hours, and allows his imagination to
run riot with sexual visions, he will be five times as much exhausted {412}
as he would by the act culminating in emission. It is the sexual excitement
more than the emission which exhausts. As shown in another part of this
work, thoughts of sexual intimacies, long continued, lead to the worst
effects. To a man, whose imagination is filled with erotic fancies the
emission comes as a merciful interruption to the burning, harassing and
wearing excitement which so constantly goads him.

16. THE DESIRE OF GOOD.--The desire of good for its own sake--this is Love.
The desire of good for bodily pleasure--this is Lust. Man is a moral being,
and as such should always act in the animal sphere according to the
spiritual law. Hence, to break the law of the highest creative action for
the mere gratification of animal instinct is to perform the act of sin and
to produce the corruption of nature.

17. CAUSE OF PROSTITUTION.--Dr. Dio Lewis says: "Occasionally we meet a
diseased female with excessive animal passion, but such a case is very
rare. The average woman has so little sexual desire that if licentiousness
depended upon her, uninfluenced by her desire to please man or secure his
support, there would be very little sexual excess. Man is strong--he has
all the money and all the facilities for business and pleasure; and woman
is not long in learning the road to his favor. Many prostitutes who take no
pleasure in their unclean intimacies not only endure a disgusting life for
the favor and means thus gained, but affect intense passion in their sexual
contacts because they have learned that such exhibitions gratify men."

18. HUSBAND'S BRUTALITY.--Husbands! It is your licentiousness that drives
your wives to a deed so abhorrent to their every wifely, womanly and
maternal instinct--a deed which ruins the health of their bodies,
prostitutes their souls, and makes marriage, maternity and womanhood itself
degrading and loathsome. No terms can sufficiently characterize the
cruelty, meanness and disgusting selfishness of your conduct when you
impose on them a maternity so detested as to drive them to the desperation
of killing their unborn children and often themselves.

19. WHAT DRUNKARDS BEQUEATH TO THEIR OFFSPRING.--Organic imperfections
unfit the brain for sane action, and habit confirms the insane condition;
the man's brain has become unsound. Then comes in the law of hereditary
descent, by which the brain of a man's children is fashioned after his
own--not as it was originally, but as it has become, in consequence of
frequent functional disturbance. Hence, of all appetites, the inherited
appetite for drunkenness is {413} the most direful. Natural laws
contemplate no exceptions, and sins against them are never pardoned.

20. THE REPORTS OF HOSPITALS.--The reports of hospitals for lunatics almost
universally assign intemperance as one of the causes which predispose a
man's offspring to insanity. This is even more strikingly manifested in the
case of congenital idiocy. They come generally from a class of families
which seem to have degenerated physically to a low degree. They are puny
and sickly.

21. SECRET DISEASES.--See the weakly, sickly and diseased children who are
born only to suffer and die, all because of the private disease of the
father before his marriage. Oh, let the truth be told that the young men of
our land may learn the lessons of purity of life. Let them learn that in
morality there is perfect protection and happiness.

[Illustration: GETTING A DIVORCE]

{414}

Physical and Moral Degeneracy.

[Illustration: THE DEGENERATE TURK.]

1. MORAL PRINCIPLE.--"Edgar Allen Poe, Lord Byron, and Robert Burns," says
Dr. Geo. F. Hall, "were men of marvelous strength intellectually. But
measured by the true rule of high moral principle, they were very weak.
Superior endowment in a single direction--physical, mental, or
spiritual--is not of itself sufficient to make one strong in all that that
heroic word means.

2. INSANE ASYLUM.--Many a good man spiritually has gone to an untimely
grave because of impaired physical powers. Many a good man spiritually has
gone to the insane asylum because of bodily and mental weaknesses. Many a
good man spiritually has fallen from virtue in an evil moment because of a
weakened will, or, a too demanding fleshly passion, or, worse than either,
too lax views on the subject of personal chastity."

3. BOYS LEARNING VICES.--Some ignorant and timid people argue that boys and
young men in reading a work of this character will learn vices concerning
which they had {415} never so much as dreamed of before. This is, however,
certain, that vices cannot be condemned unless they are mentioned; and if
the condemnation is strong enough it surely will be a source of strength
and of security. If light and education, on these important subjects, does
injury, then all knowledge likewise must do more wrong than good. Knowledge
is power, and the only hope of the race is enlightenment on all subjects
pertaining to their being.

4. MORAL MANHOOD.--It is clearly visible that the American manhood is
rotting down--decaying at the center. The present generation shows many men
of a small body and weak principles, and men and women of this kind are
becoming more and more prevalent. Dissipation and indiscretions of all kind
are working ruin. Purity of life and temperate habits are being too
generally disregarded.

5. YOUNG WOMEN.--The vast majority of graduates from the schools and
colleges of our land to-day, and two-thirds of the membership of our
churches, and three-fourths of the charitable workers, are females.
Everywhere girls are carrying off most of the prizes in competitive
examinations, because women, as a sex, naturally maintain a better
character, take better care of their bodies, and are less addicted to bad
and injurious habits. While all this is true in reference to females, you
will find that the male sex furnishes almost the entire number of
criminals. The saloons, gambling dens, the brothels, and bad literature are
drawing down all that the public schools can build up. Seventy per cent. of
the young men of this land do not darken the church door. They are not
interested in moral improvement or moral education. Eighty-five per cent.
leave school under 15 years of age; prefer the loafer's honors to the
benefit of school.

6. PROMOTION.--The world is full of good places for good young men, and all
the positions of trust now occupied by the present generation will soon be
filled by the competent young men of the coming generation; and he that
keeps his record clean, lives a pure life, and avoids excesses or
dissipations of all kinds, and fortifies his life with good habits, is the
young man who will be heard from, and a thousand places will be open for
his services.

7. PERSONAL PURITY.--Dr. George F. Hall says: "Why not pay careful
attention to man in all his elements of strength, physical, mental, and
moral? Why not make personal purity a fixed principle in the manhood of the
present and coming generations, and thus insure the best men the world has
ever seen? It can be done. Let every reader of these lines resolve that he
will be one to help do it."

       *       *       *       *       *


{416}

Immorality, Disease and Death.

[Illustration: Charles Dickens' Chair and Desk.]

1. THE POLICY OF SILENCE.--There is no greater delusion than to suppose
that vast number of boys know nothing about practices of sin. Some parents
are afraid that unclean thoughts may be suggested by these very defences.
The danger is slight. Such cases are barely possible, but when the untold
thousands are thought of on the other side, who have been demoralized from
childhood through ignorance, and who are to-day suffering the result of
these vicious practices, the policy of silence stands condemned, and
intelligent knowledge abundantly justified. The emphatic words of Scripture
are true in this respect also, "The people are destroyed for lack of
knowledge."

2. LIVING ILLUSTRATIONS.--Without fear of truthful contradiction we affirm
that the homes, public assemblies, and streets of all our large cities
abound to-day with living illustrations and proofs of the widespread
existence of this physical and moral scourge. An enervated and stunted
manhood, a badly developed physique, a marked absence of manly and womanly
strength and beauty, are painfully common everywhere. Boys and girls, young
men and women, exist by thousands, of whom it may be said, they were badly
born and ill-developed. Many of these are, to some extent, bearing the
penalty of the sins and excesses of their parents, especially their
fathers, whilst the great majority are reaping the fruits of their own
immorality in a dwarfed and ill-formed body, and effeminate appearance,
weak and enervated mind. {417}

3. EFFEMINATE AND SICKLY YOUNG MEN.--The purposeless and aimless life of
any number of effeminate and sickly young men, is to be distinctly
attributed to these sins. The large class of mentally impotent
"ne'er-do-wells" are being constantly recruited and added to by those who
practice what the celebrated Erichson calls "that hideous sin engendered by
vice, and practiced in solitude"--the sin, be it observed, which is the
common cause of physical and mental weakness, and of the fearfully
impoverishing night-emissions, or as they are commonly called,
"wet-dreams."

4. WEAKNESS, DISEASE, DEFORMITY, AND DEATH.--Through self-pollution and
fornication the land is being corrupted with weakness, disease, deformity,
and death. We regret to say that we cannot speak with confidence concerning
the moral character of the Jew; but we have people amongst us who have
deservedly a high character for the tone of their moral life--we refer to
the members of the Society of Friends. The average of life amongst these
reaches no less than fifty-six years; and, whilst some allowance must be
made for the fact that amongst the Friends the poor have not a large
representation, these figures show conclusively the soundness of this
position,

5. SOWING THEIR WILD OATS.--It is monstrous to suppose that healthy
children should die just as they are coming to manhood. The fact that
thousands of young people do reach the age of sixteen or eighteen, and then
decline and die, should arouse parents to ask the question: Why? Certainly
it would not be difficult to tell the reason in thousands of instances, and
yet the habit and practice of the deadly sin of self-pollution is actually
ignored; it is even spoken of as a boyish folly not to be mentioned, and
young men literally burning up with lust are mildly spoken of as "sowing
their wild oats." Thus the cemetery is being filled with masses of the
youth of America who, as in Egypt of old, fill up the graves of uncleanness
and lust. Some time since a prominent Christian man was taking exception to
my addressing men on this subject; observe this! one of his own sons was at
that very time near the lunatic asylum through these disgusting sins. What
folly and madness this is!

6. DEATH TO TRUE MANHOOD.--The question for each one is, "In what way are
you going to divert the courses of the streams of energy which pertain to
youthful vigor and manhood?" To be destitute of that which may be described
as raw material in the human frame, means that no really vigorous manhood
can have place; to burn up the juices of the system in the fires of lust is
madness and wanton folly, {418} but it can be done. To divert the currents
of life and energy from blood and brain, from memory and muscle, in order
to secrete it for the shambles of prostitution, is death to true manhood;
but remember, it can be done! The generous liquid life may inspire the
brain and blood with noble impulse and vital force, or it may be sinned
away and drained out of the system until the jaded brain, the faded cheek,
the enervated young manhood, the gray hair, narrow chest, weak voice, and
the enfeebled mind show another victim in the long catalogue of the
degraded through lust.

7. THE SISTERHOOD OF SHAME AND DEATH.--Whenever we pass the sisterhood of
death, and hear the undertone of song, which is one of the harlot's methods
of advertising, let us recall the words, that these represent the
"pestilence which walketh in darkness, the destruction that wasteth at
noonday." The allusion, of course, is to the fact that the great majority
of these harlots are full of loathsome physical and moral disease; with the
face and form of an angel, these women "bite like a serpent and sting like
an adder;" their traffic is not for life, but inevitably for shame,
disease, and death. Betrayed and seduced themselves, they in their turn
betray and curse others.

8. WARNING OTHERS.--Have you never been struck with the argument of the
Apostle, who, warning others from the corrupt example of the fleshy Esau,
said, "Lest there be any fornicator or profane person as Esau, who for one
mess of meat sold his own birthright. For ye know that even afterward, when
he desired to inherit the blessing, he was rejected, he found no place for
repentance, though he sought it diligently with tears." Terrible and
striking words are these. His birthright sold for a mess of meat. The
fearful costs of sin--yes, that is the thought, particularly the sin of
fornication! Engrave that word upon your memories and hearts--"One mess of
meat."

9. THE HARLOT'S MESS OF MEAT.--Remember it, young men, when you are tempted
to this sin. For a few minutes' sensual pleasure, for a mess of harlot's
meat, young men are paying out the love of the son and brother; they are
deceiving, lying, and cheating for a mess of meat; for a mess, not seldom
of putrid flesh, men have paid down purity and prayer, manliness and
godliness; for a mess of meat some perhaps have donned their best attire,
and assumed the manners of the gentleman, and then, like an infernal
hypocrite, dogged the steps of maiden or harlot to satisfy their degrading
lust; for a mess of meat young men have deceived father and mother, and
shrunk from the embrace of {419} love of the pure-minded sister. For the
harlot's mess of meat some listening to me have spent scores of hours of
invaluable time. They have wearied the body, diseased and demoralized the
mind. The pocket has been emptied, theft committed, lies unnumbered told,
to play the part of the harlot's mate--perchance a six-foot fool, dragged
into the filth and mire of the harlot's house. You called her your friend,
when, but for her mess of meat, you would have passed her like dirt in the
street.

10. SEEING LIFE.--You consorted with her for your mutual shame and death,
and then called it "seeing life." Had your mother met you, you would have
shrunk away like a craven cur. Had your sister interviewed you, she had
blushed to bear your name; or had she been seen by you in company with some
other whoremaster, for similar commerce, you would have wished that she had
been dead. Now what think you of this "seeing life?" And it is for this
that tens of thousands of strong men in our large cities are selling their
birthright.

11. THE DEVIL'S DECOYS.--Some may be ready to affirm that physical and
moral penalties do not appear to overtake all men; that many men known to
be given to intemperance and sensuality are strong, well, and live to a
good age. Let us not make any mistake concerning these; they are exceptions
to the rule; the appearance of health in them is but the grossness of
sensuality. You have only carefully to look into the faces of these men to
see that their countenances, eyes, and speech betray them. They are simply
the devil's decoys.

12. GROSSNESS OF SENSUALITY.--The poor degraded harlot draws in the victims
like a heavily charged lodestone; these men are found in large numbers
throughout the entire community; they would make fine men were they not
weighted with the grossness of sensuality; as it is, they frequent the
race-course, the card-table, the drinking-saloon, the music-hall, and the
low theaters, which abound in our cities and towns; the great majority of
these are men of means and leisure. Idleness is their curse, their
opportunity for sin; you may know them as the loungers over
refreshment-bars, as the retailers of the latest filthy joke, or as the
vendors of some disgusting scandal; indeed, it is appalling the number of
these lepers found both in our business and social circles.

       *       *       *       *       *


{421}

Poisonous Literature and Bad Pictures.

[Illustration: PALESTINE WATER CARRIERS.]

1. OBSCENE LITERATURE.--No other source contributes so much to sexual
immorality as obscene literature. The mass of stories published in the
great weeklies and the cheap novels are mischievous. When the devil
determines to take charge of a young soul, he often employs a very
ingenious method. He slyly hands a little novel filled with "voluptuous
forms," "reclining on bosoms," "languishing eyes," etc.

2. MORAL FORCES.--The world is full of such literature. It is easily
accessible, for it is cheap, and the young will procure it, and therefore
become easy prey to its baneful influence and effects. It weakens the moral
forces of the young, and they thereby fall an easy prey before the subtle
schemes of the libertine.

3. BAD BOOKS.--Bad books play not a small part in the corruption of the
youth. A bad book is as bad as an evil companion. In some respects it is
even worse than a living teacher of vice, since it may cling to an
individual at all times. It will follow him and poison his mind with the
venom of evil. The influence of bad books in making bad boys and men is
little appreciated. Few are aware how much evil seed is being sown among
the young everywhere through the medium of vile books.

4. SENSATIONAL STORY BOOKS.--Much of the evil literature which is sold in
nickel and dime novels, and which constitutes the principal part of the
contents of such papers as the "Police Gazette," the "Police News," and a
large proportion of the sensational story books which flood the land. You
might better place a coal of fire or a live viper in your bosom, than allow
yourself to read such a book. The thoughts that are implanted in the mind
in youth will often stick there through life, in spite of all efforts to
dislodge them.

5. PAPERS AND MAGAZINES.--Many of the papers and magazines sold at our news
stands, and eagerly sought after by young men and boys, are better suited
for the parlors of a house of ill-fame than for the eyes of pure-minded
youth. A newsdealer who will distribute such vile sheets ought to be dealt
with as an educator in vice and crime, an agent of evil, and a recruiting
officer of hell and perdition.

6. SENTIMENTAL LITERATURE OF LOW FICTION.--Sentimental literature, whether
impure in its subject matter or not, has {422} a direct tendency in the
direction of impurity. The stimulation of the emotional nature, the
instilling of sentimental ideas into the minds of the young, has a tendency
to turn the thoughts into a channel which leads in the direction of the
formation of vicious habits.

7. IMPRESSIONS LEFT BY READING QUESTIONABLE LITERATURE.--It is painful to
see strong intelligent men and youths reading bad books, or feasting their
eyes on filthy pictures, for the practice is sure to affect their personal
purity. Impressions will be left which cannot fail to breed a legion of
impure thoughts, and in many instances criminal deeds. Thousands of
elevator boys, clerks, students, traveling men, and others, patronize the
questionable literature counter to an alarming extent.

8. THE NUDE IN ART.--For years there has been a great craze after the nude
in art, and the realistic in literature. Many art galleries abound in
pictures and statuary which cannot fail to fan the fires of sensualism,
unless the thoughts of the visitor are trained to the strictest purity. Why
should artists and sculptors persist in shocking the finer sensibilities of
old and young of both sexes by crowding upon their view representations of
naked human forms in attitudes of luxurious abandon? Public taste may
demand it. But let those who have the power endeavor to reform public
taste.

9. WIDELY DIFFUSED.--Good men have ever lamented the pernicious influence
of a depraved and perverted literature. But such literature has never been
so systematically and widely diffused as at the present time. This is owing
to two causes, its cheapness and the facility of conveyance.

10. INFLAME THE PASSIONS.--A very large proportion of the works thus put in
circulation are of the worst character, tending to corrupt the principles,
to inflame the passions, to excite impure desire, and spread a blight over
all the powers of the soul. Brothels are recruited from this more than any
other source. Those who search the trunks of convicted criminals are almost
sure to find in them one or more of these works; and few prisoners who can
read at all fail to enumerate among the causes which led them into crime
the unhealthy stimulus of this depraved and poisonous literature.

[Illustration]

{423}

Startling Sins.

[Illustration]

1. NAMELESS CRIMES.--The nameless crimes identified with the hushed-up
Sodomite cases; the revolting condition of the school of Sodomy; the
revelations of the Divorce Court concerning the condition of what is called
national nobility, and upper classes, as well as the unclean spirit which
attaches to "society papers," has revealed a condition which is perfectly
disgusting.

2. UNFAITHFULNESS.--Unfaithfulness amongst husbands and wives in the upper
classes is common and adultery rife everywhere; mistresses are kept in all
directions; thousands of these rich men have at least two, and not seldom
three establishments.

3. A FRIGHTFUL INCREASE.--Facts which have come to light during the past
ten years show a frightful increase in every form of licentiousness; the
widely extended area over which whoredom and degrading lust have thrown the
glamor of their fascinating toils is simply appalling. {424}

4. MORAL CARNAGE.--We speak against the fearful moral carnage; would to God
that some unmistakable manifestation of the wrath of God should come in and
put a stop to this huge seed-plot of national demoralization! We are
reaping in this disgusting centre the harvest of corruption which has come
from the toleration and encouragements given by the legislature, the
police, and the magistrates to immorality, vice, and sin; the awful fact
is, that we are in the midst of the foul and foetid harvest of lust. Aided
by some of the most exalted personages in the land, assisted by thousands
of educated and wealthy whoremongers and adulterers, we are reaping also,
in individual physical ugliness and deformity, that which has been sown;
the puny, ill-formed and mentally weak youths and maidens, men and women,
to be seen in large numbers in our principal towns and cities, represent
the widespread nature of the curse which has, in a marked manner, impaired
the physique, the morality, and the intelligence of the nation.

5. DAILY PRESS.--The daily press has not had the moral courage to say one
word; the quality of demoralizing novels such as have been produced from
the impure brain and unclean imaginations; the subtle, clever, and
fascinating undermining of the white-winged angel of purity by modern
sophists, whose prurient and vicious volumes were written to throw a halo
of charm and beauty about the brilliant courtesan and the splendid
adulteress; the mixing up of lust and love; the making of corrupt passion
to stand in the garb of a deep, lasting, and holy affection--these are some
of the hideous seedlings which, hidden amid the glamor and fascination of
the seeming "angel of light," have to so large an extent corrupted the
morality of the country.

6. NIGHTLY EXHIBITIONS.--Some of you know what the nightly exhibitions in
these garlanded temples of whorish incentive are. There is the variety
theatre, with its disgusting ballet dancing, and its shamelessly indecent
photographs exhibited in every direction. What a clear gain to morality it
would be if the accursed houses were burnt down, and forbidden by law ever
to be re-built or re-opened; the whole scene is designed to act upon and
stimulate the lusts and evil passions of corrupt men and women.

7. CONFIDENCE AND EXPOSURE.--I hear some of you say, cannot some influence
be brought to bear upon this plague-spot? Will the legislature or congress
do nothing? Is the law and moral right to continue to be trodden under
foot? Are the magistrates and the police powerless? The truth is the
harlots and whoremongers are master of the situation; the moral sense of
the legislators, the magistrates, and the {425} police is so low that
anything like confidence is at present out of the question.

8. THE SISTERHOOD OF SHAME AND DEATH.--It is enough to make angels weep to
see a great mass of America's wealthy and better-class sons full of zeal
and on fire with interest in the surging hundreds of the sisterhood of
shame and death. Many of these men act as if they were--if they do not
believe they are--dogs. No poor hunted dog in the streets was ever tracked
by a yelping crowd of curs more than is the fresh girl or chance of a maid
in the accursed streets of our large cities. Price is no object, nor
parentage, nor home; it is the truth to affirm that hundreds and thousands
of well-dressed and educated men come in order to the gratification of
their lusts, and to this end they frequent this whole district; they have
reached this stage, they are being burned up in this fire of lust; men of
whom God says, "Having eyes full of adultery and that cannot cease sin."

9. LAW MAKERS.--Now should any member of the legislature rise up and
testify against this "earthly hell," and speak in defence of the moral
manhood and womanhood of the nation, he would be greeted as a fanatic, and
laughed down amid derisive cheers; such has been the experience again and
again. Therefore attack this great stronghold which for the past thirty
years has warred and is warring against our social manhood and womanhood,
and constantly undermining the moral life of the nation; against this
citadel of licentiousness, this metropolitan centre of crime, and vice, and
sin, direct your full blast of righteous and manly indignation.

[Illustration]

10. TEMPLES OF LUST.--Here stand the foul and splendid temples of lust,
intemperance, and passion, into whose vortex tens of thousands of our sons
and daughters are constantly being drawn. Let it be remembered that this
whole area represents the most costly conditions, and proves beyond
question that an enormous proportion of the wealthy manhood of the nation,
and we as citizens sustain, partake, and share in this carnival of death.
Is it any wonder that the robust type of godly manhood which used to be
found in the legislature, is sadly wanting now, or that the wretched
caricatures of manhood which find form and place in such papers as "Truth"
and the "World" are accepted as representing "modern society?"

11. PURITANIC MANHOOD.--It is a melancholy fact that by reason of
uncleanness, we have almost lost regard for the type of puritanic manhood
which in the past held aloft the standard of a chaste and holy life; such
men in this day are spoken of as "too slow" as "weak-kneed," and {426}
"goody-goody" men. Let me recall that word, the fast and indecently-dressed
"things," the animals of easy virtue, the "respectable" courtesans that
flirt, chaff, gamble, and waltz with well-known high-class licentious
lepers--such is the ideal of womanhood which a large proportion of our
large city society accepts, fawns upon, and favors.

12. SHAMEFUL CONDITIONS.--Perhaps one of the most inhuman and shameful
conditions of modern fashionable society, both in England and America, is
that which wealthy men and women who are married destroy their own children
in the embryo stage of being, and become murderers thereby. This is done to
prevent what should be one of our chief glories, viz., large and
well-developed home and family life.

       *       *       *       *       *


{427}

The Prostitution of Men.

CAUSE AND REMEDY.

1. EXPOSED YOUTH.--Generally even in the beginning of the period when
sexual uneasiness begins to show itself in the boy, he is exposed in
schools, institutes, and elsewhere to the temptations of secret vice, which
is transmitted from youth to youth, like a contagious corruption, and which
in thousands destroys the first germs of virility. Countless numbers of
boys are addicted to these vices for years. That they do not in the
beginning of nascent puberty proceed to sexual intercourse with women, is
generally due to youthful timidity, which dares not reveal its desire, or
from want of experience for finding opportunities. The desire is there, for
the heart is already corrupted.

2. BOYHOOD TIMIDITY OVERCOME.--Too often a common boy's timidity is
overcome by chance or by seduction, which is rarely lacking in great cities
where prostitution is flourishing, and thus numbers of boys immediately
after the transition period of youth, in accordance with the previous
secret practice, accustom themselves to the association with prostitute
women, and there young manhood and morals are soon lost forever.

3. MARRIAGE-BED RESOLUTIONS.--Most men of the educated classes enter the
marriage-bed with the consciousness of leaving behind them a whole army of
prostitutes or seduced women, in whose arms they cooled their passions and
spent the vigor of their youth. But with such a past the married man does
not at the same time leave behind him its influence on his inclinations.
The habit of having a feminine being at his disposal for every rising
appetite, and the desire for change inordinately indulged for years,
generally make themselves felt again as soon as the honeymoon is over.
Marriage will not make a morally corrupt man all at once a good man and a
model husband.

4. THE INJUSTICE OF MAN.--Now, although many men are in a certain sense
"not worthy to unloose the latchet of the shoes" of the commonest woman,
much less to "unfasten her girdle," yet they make the most extravagant
demands on the feminine sex. Even the greatest debauchee, who has spent his
vigor in the arms of a hundred courtesans, will cry out fraud and treachery
if he does not receive his newly married bride as an untouched virgin. Even
the most dissolute husband will look on his wife as deserving of death if
his daily infidelity is only once reciprocated. {428}

5. UNJUST DEMANDS.--The greater the injustice a husband does to his wife,
the less he is willing to submit to from her; the oftener he becomes
unfaithful to her, the stricter he is in demanding faithfulness from her.
We see that despotism nowhere denies its own nature: the more a despot
deceives and abuses his people, the more submissiveness and faithfulness he
demands of them.

6. SUFFERING WOMEN.--Who can be astonished at the many unhappy marriages,
if he knows how unworthy most men are of their wives? Their virtues they
rarely can appreciate, and their vices they generally call out by their
own. Thousands of women suffer from the results of a mode of life of which
they, having remained pure in their thought, have no conception whatever;
and many an unsuspecting wife nurses her husband with tenderest care in
sicknesses which are nothing more than the consequences of his amours with
other women.

7. AN INHUMAN CRIMINAL.--When at last, after long years of delusion and
endurance, the scales drop from the eyes of the wife, and revenge or
despair drives her into a hostile position towards her lord and master, she
is an inhuman criminal, and the hue and cry against the fickleness of women
and the falsity of their nature is endless. Oh, the injustice of society
and the injustice of cruel man. Is there no relief for helpless women that
are bound by the ties of marriage to men who are nothing but rotten
corruption?

8. VULGAR DESIRE.--The habit of regarding the end and aim of woman only
from the most vulgar side--not to respect in her the noble human being, but
to see in her only the instrument of sensual desire--is carried so far
among men that they will allow it to force into the background
considerations among themselves, which they otherwise pretend to rank very
high.

[Illustration]

9. THE ONLY REMEDY.--But when the feeling of women has once been driven to
indignation with respect to the position which they occupy, it is to be
hoped that they will compel men to be pure before marriage, and they will
remain loyal after marriage.

10. WORSE THAN SAVAGES.--With all our civilization we are put to shame even
by the savages. The savages know of no fastidiousness of the sexual
instinct and of no brothels. We are, indeed, likewise savages, but in quite
a different sense. Proof of this is especially furnished by our youth. But
that our students, and young men in general, usually pass through the
school of corruption and drag the filth of the road which they have
traversed before marriage along {429} with them throughout life, is not
their fault so much as the fault of prejudices and of our political and
social conditions that prohibits a proper education, and the placing of the
right kind of literature on these subjects into the hands of young people.

11. REASON AND REMEDY.--Keep the youth pure by a thorough system of plain
unrestricted training. The seeds of immorality are sown in youth, and the
secret vice eats out their young manhood often before the age of puberty.
They develop a bad character as they grow older. Young girls are ruined,
and licentiousness and prostitution flourish. Keep the boys pure and the
harlot would soon lose her vocation. Elevate the morals of the boys, and
you will have pure men and moral husbands.

       *       *       *       *       *


{430}

The Road to Shame.

[Illustration: SUICIDE LAKE.]

1. INSULT TO MOTHER OR SISTER.--Young men, it can never under any
circumstances be right for you to do to a woman that, which, if another man
did to your mother or sister, you could never forgive! The very thought is
revolting. Let us suppose a man guilty of this shameful sin, and I
apprehend that each of us would feel ready to shoot the villain. We are not
justifying the shooting, but appealing to your instinctive sense of right,
in order to show the enormity of this fearful crime, and to fasten strong
conviction in your mind against this sin. {431}

2. A RUINED SISTER.--What would you think of a man, no matter what his
wealth, culture, or gentlemanly bearing, who should lay himself out for the
seduction and shame of your beloved sister? Her very name now reminds you
of the purest affection: think of her, if you can bear it, ruined in
character, and soon to become an unhappy mother. To whom can you introduce
her? What can you say concerning her? How can her own brothers and sisters
associate with her? and, mark! all this personal and relative misery caused
by this genteel villain's degrading passion.

3. YOUNG MAN LOST.--Another terrible result of this sin is the practical
overthrow of natural affection which it effects. A young man comes from his
father's house to Chicago. Either through his own lust or through the
corrupt companions that he finds in the house of business where he resides,
he becomes the companion of lewd women. The immediate result is a bad
conscience, a sense of shame, and a breach in the affections of home.
Letters are less frequent, careless, and brief. He cannot manifest true
love now. He begins to shrink from his sister and mother, and well he may.

4. THE HARLOT'S INFLUENCE.--He has spent the strength of his affection and
love for home. In their stead the wretched harlot has filled him with
unholy lust. His brain and heart refuse to yield him the love of the son
and brother. His hand can not write as aforetime, or at best, his
expressions become a hypocritical pretence. Fallen into the degradation of
the fornicator, he has changed a mother's love and sister's affection for
the cursed fellowship of the woman "whose house is the way to hell." (Prov.
VII. 27.)

5. THE WAY OF DEATH.--Observe, that directly the law of God is broken, and
wherever promiscuous intercourse between the sexes takes place, gonorrhoea,
syphilis, and every other form of venereal disease is seen in hideous
variety. It is only true to say that thousands of both sexes are slain
annually by these horrible diseases. What must be the moral enormity of a
sin, which, when committed, produces in vast numbers of cases such
frightful physical and moral destruction as that which is here portrayed?

6. A HARLOT'S WOES.--Would to God that something might be done to rescue
fallen women from their low estate. We speak of them as "fallen women".
Fallen, indeed, they are, but surely not more deserving of the application
of that term than the "fallen men" who are their partners and paramours. It
is easy to use the words, "a fallen woman", but who can apprehend all that
is involved in the {432} expression, seeing that every purpose for which
God created woman is prostituted and destroyed? She is now neither maiden,
wife, nor mother; the sweet names of sister and betrothed can have no
legitimate application in her case.

7. THE PENALTIES FOR LOST VIRTUE.--Can the harlot be welcomed where either
children, brothers, sisters, wife, or husband are found? Surely, no. Home
is a sphere alien to the harlot's estate. See such an one wherever you
may--she is a fallen outcast from woman's high estate. Her existence--for
she does not live--now culminates in one dread issue, viz., prostitution.
She sleeps, but awakes a harlot. She rises in the late morning hours, but
her object is prostitution; she washes, dresses, and braids her hair, but
it is with one foul purpose before her. To this end she eats, drinks, and
is clothed. To this end her house is hidden and the blinds are drawn.

8. LOST FOREVER.--To this end she applies the unnatural cosmetique, and
covers herself with sweet perfumes, which vainly try to hide her disease
and shame. To this end she decks herself with dashing finery and tawdry
trappings, and with bold, unwomanly mien essays the streets of the great
city. To this end she is loud and coarse and impudent. To this end she is
the prostituted "lady," with simpering words, and smiles, and glamour of
refined deceit. To this end an angel face, a devil in disguise. There is
one foul and ghastly purpose towards which all her energies now tend. So
low has she fallen, so lost is she to all the design of woman, that she
exists for one foul purpose only, viz., to excite, stimulate, and gratify
the lusts of degraded, ungodly men. Verily, the word "prostitute" has an
awful meaning. What plummet can sound the depths of a woman's fall who has
become a harlot?

9. SOUND THE ALARM.--Remember, young man, you can never rise above the
degradation of the companionship of lewd women. Your virtue once lost is
lost forever. Remember, young woman, your wealth or riches is your good
name and good character--you have nothing else. Give a man your virtue and
he will forsake you, and you will be forsaken by all the world. Remember
that purity of purpose brings nobility of character, and an honorable life
is the joy and security of mankind.

       *       *       *       *       *


{433}

The Curse of Manhood.

[Illustration: THE GREAT PHILANTHROPIST.]

1. MORAL LEPERS.--We cannot but denounce in the strongest terms, the
profligacy of many married men. Not content with the moderation permitted
in the divine appointed relationship of marriage, they become adulterers,
in order to gratify their accursed lust. The man in them is trodden down by
the sensual beast which reigns supreme. These are the moral outlaws that
make light of this scandalous social iniquity, and by their damnable
example encourage young men to sin.

2. A SAD CONDITION.--It is constantly affirmed by prostitutes, that amongst
married men are found their chief supporters. Evidence from such a quarter
must be received with considerable caution. Nevertheless, we believe that
there is much truth in this statement. Here, again, we lay {434} the ax to
the root of the tree; the married man who dares affirm that there is a
particle of physical necessity for this sin, is a liar, and the truth is
not in him. Whether these men be princes, peers, legislators, professional
men, mechanics, or workmen, they are moral pests, a scandal to the social
state, and a curse to the nation.

3. EXCESSES.--Many married men exhaust themselves by these excesses; they
become irritable, liable to cold, to rheumatic affections, and nervous
depression. They find themselves weary when they rise in the morning.
Unfitted for close application to business, they become dilatory and
careless, often lapsing into entire lack of energy, and not seldom into the
love of intoxicating stimulants. Numbers of husbands and wives entering
upon these experiences lose the charm of health, the cheerfulness of life
and converse. Home duties become irksome to the wife; the brightness,
vivacity, and bloom natural to her earlier years, decline; she is spoken of
as highly nervous, poorly, and weak, when the whole truth is that she is
suffering from physical exhaustion which she cannot bear. Her features
become angular, her hair prematurely gray, she rapidly settles down into
the nervous invalid, constantly needing medical aid, and, if possible,
change of air.

4. IGNORANCE.--These conditions are brought about in many cases through
ignorance on the part of those who are married. Multitudes of men have
neither read, heard, nor known the truth of this question. We sympathize
with our fellow-men in this, that we have been left in practical ignorance
concerning the exceeding value and legitimate uses of these functions of
our being. Some know, that, had they known these things in the early days
of their married life, it would have proved to them knowledge of exceeding
value. If this counsel is followed, thousands of homes will scarcely know
the need of the physician's presence.

5. ANIMAL PASSION.--Common-sense teaches that children who are begotten in
the heat of animal passion, are likely to be licentious when they grow up.
Many parents through excesses of eating and drinking, become inflamed with
wine and strong drink., They are sensualists, and consequently, morally
diseased. Now, if in such conditions men beget their children, who can
affect surprise if they develop licentious tendencies? Are not such parents
largely to blame? Are they not criminals in a high degree? Have they not
fouled their own nest, and transmitted to their children predisposition to
moral evil?

6. FAST YOUNG MEN.--Many of our "fast young men" have been thus corrupted,
even as the children of the {435} intemperate are proved to have been.
Certainly no one can deny that many of our "well-bred" young men are little
better than "high-class dogs" so lawless are they, and ready for the arena
of licentiousness.

7. THE PURE-MINDED WIFE.--Happily, as tens of thousands of husbands can
testify, the pure-minded wife and mother is not carried away, as men are
liable to be, with the force of animal passion. Were it not so, the
tendencies to licentiousness in many sons would be stronger than they are.
In the vast majority of cases suggestion is never made except by the
husband, and it is a matter of deepest gratitude and consideration, that
the true wife may become a real helpmeet in restraining this desire in the
husband.

8. YOUNG WIFE AND CHILDREN.--We often hear it stated that a young wife has
her children quickly. This cannot happen to the majority of women without
injury to health and jeopardy to life. The law which rendered it imperative
for the land to lie fallow in order to rest and gain renewed strength, is
only another illustration of the unity which pervades physical conditions
everywhere. It should be known that if a mother nurses her own babe, and
the child is not weaned until it is nine or ten months old, the mother,
except in rare cases, will not become enceinte again, though cohabitation
with the husband takes place.

9. SELFISH AND UNNATURAL CONDUCT.--It is natural and rational that a mother
should feed her own children; in the selfish and unnatural conduct of many
mothers, who, to avoid the self-denial and patience which are required,
hand the little one over to the wet-nurse, or to be brought up by hand, is
found in many cases the cause and reason of the unnatural haste of
child-bearing. Mothers need to be taught that the laws of nature cannot be
broken without penalty. For every woman whose health has been weakened
through nursing her child, a hundred have lost strength and health through
marital excesses. The haste of having children is the costly penalty which
women pay for shirking the mother's duty to the child.

10. LAW OF GOD.--So graciously has the law of God been arranged in regard
to the mother's strength, that, if it be obeyed, there will be, as a rule,
an interval of at least from eighteen months to two years between the birth
of one child and that of another. Every married man should abstain during
certain natural seasons. In this periodical recurrence God has instituted
to every husband the law of restraint, and insisted upon self-control.

11. TO YOUNG PEOPLE WHO ARE MARRIED.--Be exceedingly careful of license and
excess in your intercourse with {436} one another. Do not needlessly
expose, by undress, the body. Let not the purity of love degenerate into
unholy lust. See to it that you walk according to the divine Word,
"Dwelling together as being heirs of the grace of life, that your prayers
be not hindered."

12. LOST POWERS.--Many young men after their union showed a marked
difference. They lost much of their natural vivacity, energy, and strength
of voice. Their powers of application, as business men, students, and
ministers, had declined, as also their enterprise, fervor, and kindliness.
They had become irritable, dull, pale, and complaining. Many cases of
rheumatic fever have been induced through impoverishment, caused by
excesses on the part of young married men.

13. MIDDLE AGE.--After middle age the sap of a man's life declines in
quantity. A man who intends close application to the ministry, to
scientific or literary pursuits, where great demands are made upon the
brain, must restrain this passion. The supplies for the brain and nervous
system are absorbed, and the seed diverted through sexual excesses in the
marriage relationship, by fornication, or by any other form of immorality,
the man's power must decline: that to this very cause may be attributed the
failure and breakdown of so many men of middle age.

14. INTOXICATING DRINKS.--By all means avoid intoxicating drinks.
Immorality and alcoholic stimulants, as we have shown, are intimately
related to one another. Wine and strong drink inflame the blood, and heat
the passions. Attacking the brain, they warp the judgment, and weaken the
power of restraint. Avoid what is called good living; it is madness to
allow the pleasures of the table to corrupt and corrode the human body. We
are not designed for gourmands, much less for educated pigs. Cold water
bathing, water as a beverage, simple and wholesome food, regularity of
sleep, plenty of exercise; games such as cricket, football, tennis,
boating, or bicycling, are among the best possible preventives against lust
and animal passion.

15. BEWARE OF IDLENESS.--Indolent leisure means an unoccupied mind. When
young men lounge along the streets, in this condition they become an easy
prey to the sisterhood of shame and death. Bear in mind that evil thoughts
precede evil actions. The hand of the worst thief will not steal until the
thief within operates upon the hand without. The members of the body which
are capable of becoming instruments of sin, are not involuntary actors.
Lustful desires must proceed from brain and heart, ere the fire that
consumes burns in the member.

       *       *       *       *       *


{437}

A Private Talk to Young Men.

[Illustration: Young Lincoln Starting to School.]

1. The most valuable and useful organs of the body are those which are
capable of the greatest dishonor, abuse and corruption. What a snare the
wonderful organism of the eye may become when used to read corrupt books or
look upon licentious scenes at the theatre, or when used to meet the
fascinating gaze of the harlot! What an instrument for depraving the whole
man may be found in the matchless powers of the brain, the hand, the ear,
the mouth, or the tongue! What potent instruments may these become in
accomplishing the ruin of the whole being for time and eternity!

2. In like manner the organ concerning the uses of which I am to speak, has
been, and continues to be, made one of the chief instruments of man's
immorality, shame, disease, and death. How important to know what the
legitimate uses of this member of the body are, and how great the {438}
dignity conferred upon us in the possession of this gift. On the human side
this gift may be truly said to bring men nearer to the high and solemn
relationship of the Creator than any other which they possess.

3. I first deal with the destructive sin of self-abuse. There can be little
doubt that vast numbers of boys are guilty of this practice. In many cases
the degrading habit has been taught by others, e.g., by elder boys at
school, where association largely results in mutual corruption. With
others, the means of sensual gratification is found out by personal action;
whilst in other cases fallen and depraved men have not hesitated to debauch
the minds of mere children by teaching them this debasing practice.

4. Thousands of youths and young men have only to use the looking-glass to
see the portrait of one guilty of this loathsome sin. The effects are
plainly discernible in the boy's appearance. The face and hands become pale
and bloodless. The eye is destitute of its natural fire and lustre. The
flesh is soft and flabby, the muscles limp and lacking healthy firmness. In
cases where the habit has become confirmed, and where the system has been
drained of this vital force, it is seen in positive ugliness, in a pale and
cadaverous appearance, slovenly gait, slouching walk, and an impaired
memory.

5. It is obvious that if the most vital physical force of a boy's life is
being spent through this degrading habit--a habit, be it observed, of rapid
growth, great strength, and difficult to break--he must develop badly. In
thousands of cases the result is seen in a low stature, contracted chest,
weak lungs, and liability to sore throat. Tendency to cold, indigestion,
depression, drowsiness, and idleness, are results distinctly traceable to
this deadly practice. Pallor of countenance, nervous and rheumatic
affections, loss of memory, epilepsy, paralysis, and insanity find their
principal predisposing cause in the same shameful waste of life. The want
of moral force and strength of mind often observable is youths and young
men is largely induced by this destructive and deadly sin.

6. Large numbers of youths pass from an exhausted boyhood into the
weakness, intermittent fevers, and consumption, which are said to carry off
so many. If the deaths were attributed primarily to loss of strength
occasioned by self-pollution, it would be much nearer the truth. It is
monstrous to suppose that a boy who comes from healthy parents should
decline and die. Without a shade of doubt the chief cause of decay and
death amongst youths and young men, is to be traced to this baneful habit.
{439}

7. It is a well-known fact that any man who desires to excel and retain his
excellence as an accurate shot, an oarsman, a pedestrian, a pugilist, a
first-class cricketer, bicyclist, student, artist, or literary man, must
abstain from self-pollution and fornication. Thousands of school boys and
students lose their positions in the class, and are plucked at the time of
their examination by reason of failure of memory, through lack of nerve and
vital force, caused mainly by draining the physical frame of the seed which
is the vigor of the life.

8. It is only true to say that thousands of young men in the early stages
of a licentious career would rather lose a right hand than have their
mothers or sisters know what manner of men they are. From the side of the
mothers and sisters it may also be affirmed that, were they aware of the
real character of those brothers and sons, they would wish that they had
never been born.

9. Let it be remembered that sexual desire is not in itself dishonorable or
sinful, any more than hunger, thirst, or any other lawful and natural
desire is. It is the gratification by unlawful means of this appetite which
renders it so corrupting and iniquitous.

10. Leisure means the opportunity to commit sin. Unclean pictures are
sought after and feasted upon, paragraphs relating to cases of divorce and
seduction are eagerly read, papers and books of an immoral character and
tendency greedily devoured, low and disgusting conversation indulged in and
repeated.

11. The practical and manly counsel to every youth and young man is, entire
abstinence from indulgence of the sexual faculty until such time as the
marriage relationship is entered upon. Neither is there, nor can there be,
any exception to this rule.

12. No man can affirm that self-denial ever injured him. On the contrary,
self-restraint has been liberty, strength and blessing. Beware of the
deceitful streams of temporary gratification, whose eddying current drifts
towards license, shame, disease and death. Remember, how quickly moral
power declines, how rapidly the edge of the fatal maelstrom is reached, how
near the vortex, how terrible the penalty, how fearful the sentence of
everlasting punishment.

13. Be a young man of principle, honor, and preserve your powers. How can
you look an innocent girl in the face when you are degrading your manhood
with the vilest practice? Keep your mind and life pure, and nobility will
be your crown.

       *       *       *       *       *


{440}

Remedies for the Social Evil.

1. MAN RESPONSIBLE.--Every great social reform must begin with the male
sex. They must either lead, or give it its support. Prostitution is a sin
wholly of their own making. All the misery, all the lust, as well as all
the blighting consequences, are chargeable wholly to the uncontrolled
sexual passion of the male. To reform sinful women, _reform the men_. Teach
them that the physiological truth means permanent moral, physical and
mental benefit, while seductive indulgence blights and ruins.

2. CONTAGIOUS DISEASES.--A man or woman cannot long live an impure life
without sooner or later contracting disease which brings to every sufferer
not only moral degradation, but often serious and vital injuries and many
times death itself becomes the only relief.

3. SHOULD IT BE REGULATED BY LAW?--Dr. G. J. Ziegler, of Philadelphia, in
several medical articles says that the act of sexual connection should be
made in itself the solemnization of marriage, and that when any such single
act can be proven against an unmarried man, by an unmarried woman, the
latter be at once invested with all the legal privileges of a wife. By
bestowing this power on women very few men would risk the dangers of the
society of a dissolute and scheming woman who might exercise the right to
force him to a marriage and ruin his reputation and life. The strongest
objection of this would be that it would increase the temptation to destroy
the purity of married women, for they could be approached without danger of
being forced into another marriage. But this objection could easily be
harmonized with a good system of well regulated laws. Many means have been
tried to mitigate the social evils, but with little encouragement. In the
city of Paris a system of registration has been inaugurated and houses of
prostitution are under the supervision of the police, yet prostitution has
not been in any degree diminished. Similar methods have been tried in other
European towns, but without satisfactory results.

4. MORAL INFLUENCE.--Let it be an imperative to every clergyman, to every
educator, to every statesman and to every philanthropist, to every father
and to every mother, to impart that moral influence which may guide and
direct the youth of the land into the natural channels of morality,
chastity and health. Then, and not till then, shall we see righteous laws
and rightly enforced for the mitigation and extermination of the modern
house of prostitution.

       *       *       *       *       *


{441}

The Selfish Slaves of Doses of Disease and Death.

[Illustration: A TURKISH CIGARETTE GIRL.]

1. MOST DEVILISH INTOXICATION.--What is the most devilish, subtle alluring,
unconquerable, hopeless and deadly form of intoxication, with which science
struggles and to which it often succumbs; which eludes the restrictive
grasp of legislation; lurks behind lace curtains, hides in luxurious
boudoirs, haunts the solitude of the study, and with waxen {442} face,
furtive eyes and palsied step totters to the secret recesses of its
self-indulgence? It is the drunkenness of drugs, and woe be unto him that
crosseth the threshold of its dream-curtained portal, for though gifted
with the strength of Samson, the courage of Richard and the genius of
Archimedes, he shall never return, and of him it is written that forever he
leaves hope behind.

2. THE MATERIAL SATAN.--The material Satan in this sensuous syndicate of
soul and body-destroying drugs is opium, and next in order of hellish
potency come cocaine and chloral.

3. GUM OPIUM.--Gum opium, from which the sulphate of morphine is made, is
the dried juice of the poppy, and is obtained principally in the orient.
Taken in moderate doses it acts specially upon the nervous system, deadens
sensibility, and the mind becomes inactive. When used habitually and
excessively it becomes a tonic, which stimulates the whole nervous system,
producing intense mental exaltation and delusive visions. When the effects
wear off, proportionate lassitude follows, which begets an insatiate and
insane craving for the drug. Under the repeated strain of the continually
increasing doses, which have to be taken to renew the desired effect, the
nervous system finally becomes exhausted, and mind and body are utterly and
hopelessly wrecked.

4. COCAINE.--Cocaine is extracted from the leaves of the Peruvian cocoa
tree, and exerts a decided influence upon the nervous system, somewhat akin
to that of coffee. It increases the heart action and is said to be such an
exhilarant that the natives of the Andes are enabled to make extraordinary
forced marches by chewing the leaves containing it. Its after effects are
more depressing even than those of opium, and insanity more frequently
results from its use.

5. CHLORAL.--The name which is derived from the first two syllables of
chlorine and alcohol, is made by passing dry chlorine gas in a continuous
stream through absolute alcohol for six or eight weeks. It is a hypnotic or
sleep-producing drug, and in moderate doses acts on the caliber of the
blood vessels of the brain, producing a soothing effect, especially in
cases of passive congestion. Some patent medicines contain chloral, bromide
and hyoscymus, and they have a large sale, being bought by persons of
wealth, who do not know what they are composed of and recklessly take them
for the effect they produce.

6. VICTIMS RAPIDLY INCREASING.--"From my experience," said a leading and
conservative druggist, "I infer that the {443} number of what are termed
opium, cocaine, and chloral "fiends" is rapidly increasing, and is greater
by two or three hundred per cent than a year ago, with twice as many women
as men represented. I should say that one person out of every fifty is a
victim of this frightful habit, which claims its doomed votaries from the
extremes of social life, those who have the most and the least to live for,
the upper classes and the cyprian, professional men of the finest
intelligence, fifty per cent of whom are doctors and walk into the pit with
eyes wide open. And lawyers and other professional men must be added to
this fated vice."

7. DESTROYS THE MORAL FIBER.--"It is a habit which utterly destroys the
moral fiber of its slaves, and makes unmitigated liars and thieves and
forgers of them, and even murder might be added to the list of crimes, were
no other road left open to the gratification of its insatiate and insane
appetite. I do not know of a single case in which it has been mastered, but
I do know of many where the end has been unspeakable misery, disgrace,
suffering, insanity and death."

8. SHAMEFUL DEATH.--To particularize further would be profitless so far as
the beginners are concerned, but would to heaven that those not within the
shadow of this shameful death would take warning from those who are. There
are no social or periodical drunkards in this sort of intoxication. The
vice is not only solitary, unsocial and utterly selfish, but incessant and
increasing in its demands.

9. APPETITE STRONGER THAN FOR LIQUOR.--This appetite is far stronger and
more uncontrollable than that for liquor, and we can spot its victim as
readily as though he were an ordinary bummer. He has a pallid complexion, a
shifting, shuffling manner and can't look you in the face. If you manage to
catch his eye for an instant you will observe that its pupil is contracted
to an almost invisible point. It is no exaggeration to say that he would
barter his very soul for that which indulgence has made him too poor to
purchase, and where artifice fails he will grovel in abject agony of
supplication for a few grains. At the same time he resorts to all kinds of
miserable and transparent shifts, to conceal his degradation. He never buys
for himself, but always for some fictitious person, and often resorts to
purchasing from distant points.

10. OPIUM SMOKING.--"Opium smoking," said another representative druggist,
"is almost entirely confined to the Chinese and they seem to thrive on it.
Very few others hit the pipe that we know of."

{444}

11. MALT AND ALCOHOLIC DRUNKENNESS.--Alcoholic stimulants have a record of
woe second to nothing. Its victims are annually marching to drunkards'
graves by the thousands. Drunkards may be divided into three classes:
First, the accidental or social drunkard; second, the periodical or
spasmodic drunkard; and third, the sot.

12. THE ACCIDENTAL OR SOCIAL DRUNKARD is yet on safe ground. He has not
acquired the dangerous craving for liquor. It is only on special occasions
that he yields to excessive indulgence; sometimes in meeting a friend, or
at some political blow-out. On extreme occasions he will indulge until he
becomes a helpless victim, and usually as he grows older occasions will
increase, and step by step he will be lead nearer to the precipice of ruin.

13. THE PERIODICAL OR SPASMODIC DRUNKARD, with whom it is always the
unexpected which occurs, and who at intervals exacts from his accumulated
capital the usury of as prolonged a spree as his nerves and stomach will
stand. Science is inclined to charitably label this specimen of man a sort
of a physiologic puzzle, to be as much pitied as blamed. Given the benefit
of every doubt, when he starts off on one of his hilarious tangents, he
becomes a howling nuisance; if he has a family, keeps them continually on
the ragged edge of apprehension, and is unanimously pronounced a "holy
terror" by his friends. His life and future is an uncertainty. He is
unreliable and cannot be long trusted. Total reformation is the only hope,
but it rarely is accomplished.

14. THE SOT.--A blunt term that needs no defining, for even the children
comprehend the hopeless degradation it implies. Laws to restrain and punish
him are framed; societies to protect and reform him are organized, and
mostly in vain. He is prone in life's very gutter; bloated, reeking and
polluted with the doggery's slops and filth. He can fall but a few feet
lower, and not until he stumbles into an unmarked, unhonored grave, where
kind mother earth and the merciful mantle of oblivion will cover and
conceal the awful wreck he made of God's own image. To the casual observer,
the large majority of the community, these three phases, at whose vagaries
many laugh, and over whose consequences millions mourn, comprehend
intoxication and its results, from the filling of the cup to its shattering
fall from the nerveless hand, and this is the end of the matter. Would to
God that it were! for at that it would be bad enough. But it is not, for
wife, children and friends must suffer and drink the cup of trouble and
sorrow to its dregs.

       *       *       *       *       *


{445}

OBJECT LESSONS OF THE EFFECTS OF ALCOHOL AND CIGARETTE SMOKING.

By PROF. GEORGE HENKLE, who personally made the postmortem examinations and
drew the following illustrations from the diseased organs just as they
appeared when first taken from the bodies of the unfortunate victims.

[Illustration: THE STOMACH of an habitual drinker of alcoholic stimulants,
showing the ulcerated condition of the mucous membrane, incapacitating this
important organ for digestive functions.]

[Illustration: THE STOMACH (interior view) of a healthy person with the
first section of the small intestines.]

{446}

[Illustration: THE LIVER of a drunkard who died of Cirrhosis of the liver,
also called granular liver, or "gin drinker's liver." The organ is much
shrunken and presents rough, uneven edges, with carbuncular non-suppurative
sores. In this self-inflicted disease the tissues of the liver undergo a
cicatrical retraction which strangulates and partly destroys the parenchyma
of the liver.]

[Illustration: THE LIVER IN HEALTH.]

{447}

[Illustration: THE KIDNEY of a man who died a drunkard, showing in upper
portion the sores so often found on kidneys of hard drinkers, and in the
lower portion, the obstruction formed in the internal arrangement of this
organ. Alcohol is a great enemy to the kidneys, and after this poison has
once set in on its destructive course in these organs no remedial agents
are known to exist to stop the already established disease.]

[Illustration: THE KIDNEY in health, with the lower section removed, to
show the filtering apparatus (Malphigian pyramids). Natural size.]

{448}

[Illustration: THE LUNGS AND HEART of a boy who died from the effects of
cigarette smoking, showing the nicotine sediments in lungs and shrunken
condition of the heart.]

[Illustration: THE LUNGS AND HEART IN HEALTH.]

[Illustration: A section of the diseased Lung of a cigarette smoker, highly
magnified.]
