
KATE SHELLEY
The Heroine of Honey Creek, who July 6, 1881, crept across the
trembling bridge in the darkness of a terrific storm, and
stopped the approaching Passenger Train.

       *       *       *       *       *

What Men Love in Women.

1. FEMALE BEAUTY.--Men love beautiful women, for woman's beauty is the
highest type of all beauty. A handsome woman needs no diamonds, no silks or
satins; her brilliant face outshines diamonds and her form is beautiful in
calico.

2. FALSE BEAUTIFIERS.--Man's love of female beauty surpasses all other
love, and whatever artificial means are used to beautify, to a certain
extent are falsehoods which lead to distrust or dislike. Artificial beauty
is always an imitation, and never can come into competition with the
genuine. No art can successfully imitate nature.

3. TRUE KIND OF BEAUTY.--Facial beauty is only skin-deep. A beautiful form,
a graceful figure, graceful movements and a kind heart are the strongest
charms in the perfection of female beauty. A brilliant face always
outshines what may be called a pretty face, for intelligence is that
queenly grace which crowns woman's influence over men. Good looks and good
and pure conduct awaken a man's love for women. A girl must therefore be
charming as well {130} as beautiful, for a charming girl will never become
a charmless wife.

4. A GOOD FEMALE BODY.--No weakly, poor-bodied woman can draw a man's love
like a strong, well developed body. A round, plump figure with an overflow
of animal life is the woman most commonly sought, for nature in man craves
for the strong qualities in women, as the health and life of offspring
depend upon the physical qualities of wife and mother. A good body and
vigorous health, therefore, become indispensable to female beauty.

5. BROAD HIPS.--A woman with a large pelvis gives her a superior and
significant appearance, while a narrow pelvis always indicate weak
sexuality. The other portions of the body however must be in harmony with
the size and breadth of the hips.

6. FULL BUSTS.--In the female beauty of physical development there is
nothing that can equal full breasts. It is an indication of good health and
good maternal qualities. As a face looks bad without a nose, so the female
breast, when narrow and flat, produces a bad effect. The female breasts are
the means on which a new-born child depends for its life and growth, hence
it is an essential human instinct for men to admire those physical
proportions in women which indicate perfect motherhood. Cotton and all
other false forms simply show the value of natural ones. All false forms
are easily detected, because large natural ones will generally quiver and
move at every step, while the artificial ones will manifest no expression
of life. As woman looks so much better with artificial paddings and
puffings than she does without, therefore modern society should waive all
objections to their use. A full breast has been man's admiration through
all climes and ages, and whether this breast-loving instinct is right or
wrong, sensible or sensual, it is a fact well known to all, that it is a
great disappointment to a husband and father to see his child brought up on
a bottle. Men love full breasts, because it promotes maternity. If,
however, the breasts are abnormally large, it indicates maternal deficiency
the same as any disproportion or extreme.

7. SMALL FEET.--Small feet and small ankles are very attractive, because
they are in harmony with a perfect female form, and men admire perfection.
Small feet and ankles indicate modesty and reserve, while large feet and
ankles indicate coarseness, physical power, authority, predominance. Feet
and ankles however must be in harmony with the body, as small feet and
small ankles on a large woman would be out of proportion and consequently
not beautiful. {131}

8. BEAUTIFUL ARMS.--As the arm is always in proportion with the other
portions of the body, consequently a well-shaped arm, small hands and small
wrists, with full muscular development, is a charm and beauty not inferior
to the face itself, and those who have well-shaped arms may be proud of
them, because they generally keep company with a fine bust and a fine
figure.

9. INTELLIGENCE.--A mother must naturally possess intelligence, in order to
rear her children intelligently, consequently it is natural for man to
chiefly admire mental qualities in women, for utility and practicability
depend upon intelligence. Therefore a man generally loves those charms in
women which prepare her for the duties of companionship. If a woman desires
to be loved, she must cultivate her intellectual gifts, be interesting and
entertaining in society, and practical and helpful in the home, for these
are some of the qualifications which make up the highest type of beauty.

10. PIETY AND RELIGION IN WOMEN.--Men who love home and the companionship
of their wives, love truth, honor and honesty. It is this higher moral
development that naturally leads them to admire women of moral and
religious natures. It is therefore not strange that immoral men love moral
and church-loving wives. Man naturally admires the qualities which tend to
the correct government of the home. Men want good and pure children, and it
is natural to select women who insure domestic contentment and happiness. A
bad man, of course, does not deserve a good wife, yet he will do his utmost
to get one.

11. FALSE APPEARANCE.--Men love reserved, coy and discreet women much more
than blunt, shrewd and boisterous. Falsehood, false hair, false curls,
false forms, false bosoms, false colors, false cheeks, and all that is
false, men naturally dislike, for in themselves they are a poor foundation
on which to form family ties, consequently duplicity and hypocrisy in women
is very much disliked by men, but a frank, honest, conscientious soul is
always lovable and lovely and will not become an old maid, except as a
matter of choice and not of necessity.

[Illustration]

{132}

History of Marriage.

[Illustration]

1. "It is not good for man to be alone," was the Divine judgment, and so
God created for him an helpmate; therefore sex is as Divine as the soul.
{133}

2. POLYGAMY.--Polygamy has existed in all ages. It is and always has been
the result of moral degradation and wantonness.

3. THE GARDEN OF EDEN.--The Garden of Eden was no harem. Primeval nature
knew no community of love; there was only the union of two souls, and the
twain were made one flesh. If God had intended man to be a polygamist he
would have created for him two or more wives; but he only created one wife
for the first man. He also directed Noah to take into the ark two of each
sort--a male and female--another evidence that God believed in pairs only.

4. ABRAHAM no doubt was a polygamist, and the general history of
patriarchal life shows that the plurality of wives and concubinage were
national customs, and not the institutions authorized by God.

5. EGYPTIAN HISTORY.--Egyptian history, in the first ostensible form we
have, shows that concubinage and polygamy were in common practice.

6. SOLOMON.--It is not strange that Solomon, with his thousand wives,
exclaimed: "All is vanity and vexation of spirit." Polygamy is not the
natural state of man.

7. CONCUBINAGE AND POLYGAMY continued till the fifth century, when the
degraded condition of woman became to some extent matters of some concern
and recognition. Before this woman was regarded simply as an instrument of
procreation, or a mistress of the household, to gratify the passions of
man.

8. THE CHINESE marriage system was, and is, practically polygamous, for
from their earliest traditions we learn, although a man could have but one
wife, he was permitted to have as many concubines as he desired.

9. MOHAMMEDANISM.--Of the 150,000,000 Mohammedans all are polygamists.
Their religion appeals to the luxury of animal propensities, and the
voluptuous character of the Orientals has penetrated western Europe and
Africa.

10. MORMONISM.--The Mormon Church, founded by Joseph Smith, practiced
polygamy until the beginning of 1893, when the church formally declared and
resigned polygamy as a part or present doctrine of their religious
institution. Yet all Mormons are polygamists at heart. It is a part of
their religion; national law alone restrains them.

11. FREE LOVERS.--There is located at Lenox, Madison County, New York, an
organization popularly known as Free Lovers. The members advocate a system
of complex marriage, a sort of promiscuity, with a freedom of love for
{134} any and all. Man offers woman support and love, woman enjoying
freedom, self-respect, health, personal and mental competency, gives
herself to man in the boundless sincerity of an unselfish union. In their
system, love is made synonymous with sexuality, and there is no doubt but
what woman is only a plaything to gratify animal caprice.

12. MONOGAMY (SINGLE WIFE), is a law of nature evident from the fact that
it fulfills the three essential conditions of man, viz.: the development of
the individual, the welfare of society and reproduction. In no nation with
a system of polygamy do we find a code of political and moral rights, and
the condition of woman is that of a slave. In polygamous countries nothing
is added to the education and civilization. The natural tendency is
sensualism, and sensualism tends to mental starvation.

13. CHRISTIAN CIVILIZATION has lifted woman from slavery to liberty.
Wherever Christian civilization prevails there are legal marriages, pure
homes and education. May God bless the purity of the home.

       *       *       *       *       *

Marriage.

 "Thus grief still treads upon the heel of pleasure,
  Married in haste we may repent at leisure."--SHAKSPEARE.

The parties are wedded. The priest or clergyman has pronounced as one those
hearts that before beat in unison with each other. The assembled guests
congratulate the happy pair. The fair bride has left her dear mother
bedewed with tears and sobbing just as if her heart would break, and as if
the happy bridegroom was leading her away captive against her will. They
enter the carriage. It drives off on the wedding tour, and his arms
encircles the yielding waist of her now all his own, while her head
reclines on the breast of the man of her choice. If she be young and has
married an old man, she will be sad. If she has married for a home, or
position, or wealth, a pang will shoot across her fair bosom. If she has
married without due consideration or on too light an acquaintance, it will
be her sorrow before long. But, if loving and beloved, she has united her
destiny with a worthy man, she will rejoice, and on her journey feel a glow
of satisfaction and delight unfelt before and which will be often renewed,
and daily prove as the living waters from some perennial spring.

       *       *       *       *       * {135}


The Advantages of Wedlock.

   'Tis sweet to hear the watch-dog's honest bark,
  Bay deep-mouthed welcome as we draw near home;
   'Tis sweet to know there is an eye will mark
  Our coming, and look brighter when we come.--BYRON, DON JUAN.

[Illustration]

1. Marriage is the natural state of man and woman. Matrimony greatly
contributes to the wealth and health of man.

2. Circumstances may compel a man not to select a companion until late in
life. Many may have parents or relatives, dependent brothers and sisters to
care for, yet family {136} ties are cultivated, notwithstanding the home is
without a wife.

3. In Christian countries the laws of marriage have greatly added to the
health of man. Marriage in barbarous countries, where little or no marriage
ceremonies are required, benefits man but little. There can be no true
domestic blessedness without loyalty and love for the select and married
companion. All the licentiousness and lust of a libertine, whether
civilized or uncivilized, bring him only unrest and premature decay.

4. A man, however, may be married and not mated, and consequently reap
trouble and unhappiness. A young couple should first carefully learn each
other by making the courtship a matter of business, and sufficiently long
that the disposition and temper of each may be thoroughly exposed and
understood.

5. First see that there is love; secondly, that there is adaptation;
thirdly, see that there are no physical defects; and if these conditions
are properly considered, cupid will go with you.

6. The happiest place on all earth is home. A loving wife and lovely
children are jewels without price, as Payne says:

 "'Mid pleasures and palaces though we may roam,
  Be it ever so humble, there's no place like home."

7. Reciprocated love produces a general exhilaration of the system. The
elasticity of the muscles is increased, the circulation is quickened, and
every bodily function is stimulated to renewed activity by a happy
marriage.

8. The consummation desired by all who experience this affection, is the
union of souls in a true marriage. Whatever of beauty or romance there may
have been in the lover's dream, is enhanced and spiritualized in the
intimate communion of married life. The crown of wifehood and maternity is
purer, more divine than that of the maiden. Passion is lost--emotions
predominate.

[Illustration: AN ALGERIAN BRIDE.]

9. TOO EARLY MARRIAGES.--Too early marriage is always bad for the female.
If a young girl marries, her system is weakened and a full development of
her body is prevented, and the dangers of confinement are considerably
increased.

10. Boys who marry young derive but little enjoyment from the connubial
state. They are liable to excesses and thereby lose much of the vitality
and power of strength and physical endurance.

11. LONG LIFE.--Statistics show that married men live longer than
bachelors. Child-bearing for women is conducive to longevity.

{137} 12. COMPLEXION.--Marriage purifies the complexion, removes blotches
from the skin, invigorates the body, fills up the tones of the voice, gives
elasticity and firmness to the step, and brings health and contentment to
old age.

13. TEMPTATIONS REMOVED.--Marriage sanctifies a home, while adultery and
libertinism produce unrest, distrust and misery. It must be remembered that
a married man can practice the most absolute continence and enjoy a far
better state of health than the licentious man. The comforts of
companionship develop purity and give rest to the soul.

14. TOTAL ABSTENTION.--It is no doubt difficult for some men to fully
abstain from sexual intercourse and be entirely chaste in mind. The great
majority of men experience frequent strong sexual desire. Abstention is
very apt to produce in their minds voluptuous images and untamable desires
which require an iron will to banish or control. The hermit in his
seclusion, or the monk in his retreat, are often flushed with these
passions and trials. It is, however, natural; for remove these passions and
man would be no longer a man. It is evident that the natural state of man
is that of marriage; and he who avoids that state is not in harmony with
the laws of his being.

15. PROSTITUTION.--Men who inherit strong passions easily argue themselves
into the belief, either to practice {138} masturbation or visit places of
prostitution, on the ground that their health demands it. Though medical
investigation has proven it repeatedly to be false, yet many believe it.
The consummation of marriage involves the mightiest issues of life and is
the most holy and sacred right recognized by man, and it is the Balm of
Gilead for many ills. Masturbation or prostitution soon blight the
brightest prospects a young man may have. Manhood is morality and purity of
purpose, not sensuality.

       *       *       *       *       *

Disadvantages of Celibacy.

[Illustration: Disadvantages of Celibacy.
Keeping Bachelor's Hall.
The Old Bachelor Sewing on His Buttons.]

1. To live the life of a bachelor has many advantages and many
disadvantages. The man who commits neither fornication, adultery nor secret
vice, and is pure in mind, surely has all the moral virtues that make a
good man and a good citizen, whether married or unmarried.

2. If a good pure-minded man does not marry, he will suffer no serious loss
of vital power; there will be no tendency to spermatorrhoea or congestion,
nor will he be afflicted with any one of those ills which certain vicious
writers and quacks would lead many people to believe. Celibacy is perfectly
consistent with mental vigor and physical strength. Regularity in the
habits of life will always have its good effects on the human body.

3. The average life of a married man is much longer than that of a
bachelor. There is quite an alarming odds in the United States in favor of
a man with a family. It is claimed that the married man lives on an average
from five to twenty years longer than a bachelor. The married man lives a
more regular life. He has his meals more regularly and is better nursed in
sickness, and in every way a happier and more contented man. The happiness
of wife and children will always add comfort and length of days to the man
who is happily married.

4. It is a fact well answered by statistics that there is more crime
committed, more vices practiced, and more immorality among single men than
among married men. Let the young man be pure in heart like Bunyan's
Pilgrim, and he can pass the deadly dens, the roaring lions, and overcome
the ravenous fires of passion, unscathed. The vices of single men support
the most flagrant of evils of modern society, hence let every young man
beware and keep his body clean and pure. His future happiness largely
depends upon his chastity while a single man.

       *       *       *       *       *


{140}

Old Maids.

[Illustration: "WE SHALL NEVER MARRY."]

1. MODERN ORIGIN.--The prejudice which certainly still exists in the
average mind against unmarried women must be of comparatively modern
origin. From the earliest ages, in ancient Greece, and Rome particularly,
the highest {141} honors were paid them. They were the ministers of the old
religions, and regarded with superstitious awe.

2. MATRIMONY.--Since the reformation, especially during the last century,
and in our own land, matrimony has been so much esteemed, notably by women,
that it has come to be regarded as in some sort discreditable for them to
remain single. Old maids are mentioned on every hand with mingled pity and
disdain, arising no doubt from the belief, conscious or unconscious, that
they would not be what they are if they could help it. Few persons have a
good word for them as a class. We are constantly hearing of lovely maidens,
charming wives, buxom widows, but almost never of attractive old maids.

3. DISCARDING PREJUDICE.--The real old maid is like any other woman. She
has faults necessarily, though not those commonly conceived of. She is
often plump, pretty, amiable, interesting, intellectual, cultured,
warm-hearted, benevolent, and has ardent friends of both sexes. These
constantly wonder why she has not married, for they feel that she must have
had many opportunities. Some of them may know why; she may have made them
her confidantes. She usually has a sentimental, romantic, frequently a sad
and pathetic past, of which she does not speak unless in the sacredness of
intimacy.

4. NOT QUARRELSOME.--She is not dissatisfied, querulous nor envious. On the
contrary, she is, for the most part, singularly content, patient and
serene,--more so than many wives who have household duties and domestic
cares to tire and trouble them.

5. REMAIN SINGLE FROM NECESSITY.--It is a stupid, as well as a heinous
mistake, that women who remain single do so from necessity. Almost any
woman can get a husband if she is so minded, as daily observation attests.
When we see the multitudes of wives who have no visible signs of
matrimonial recommendation, why should we think that old maids have been
totally neglected? We may meet those who do not look inviting. But we meet
any number of wives who are even less inviting.

[Illustration: "WE HAVE CHANGED OUR MINDS."]

6. FIRST OFFER.--The appearance and outgiving of many wives denote that
they have accepted the first offer; the appearance and outgiving of many
old maids that they have declined repeated offers. It is undeniable, that
wives, in the mass, have no more charm than old maids have, in the mass.
But, as the majority of women are married, they are no more criticised nor
commented on, in the bulk, than the whole sex are. They are spoken of
individually as pretty or {143} plain, bright or dull, pleasant or
unpleasant; while old maids are judged as a species, and almost always
unfavorable.

7. BECOMES A WIFE.--Many an old maid, so-called, unexpectedly to her
associates becomes a wife, some man of taste, discernment and sympathy
having induced her to change her state. Probably no other man of his kind
has proposed before, which accounts for her singleness. After her marriage
hundreds of persons who had sneered at her condition find her charming,
thus showing the extent of their prejudice against feminine celibacy. Old
maids in general, it is fair to presume, do not wait for opportunities, but
for proposers of an acceptable sort. They may have, indeed they are likely
to have, those, but not to meet these.

8. NO LONGER MARRY FOR SUPPORT.--The time has changed and women have
changed with it. They have grown more sensible, more independent in
disposition as well as circumstances. They no longer marry for support;
they have proved their capacity to support themselves, and self-support has
developed them in every way. Assured that they can get on comfortably and
contentedly alone they are better adapted by the assurance for consortship.
They have rapidly increased from this and cognate causes, and have so
improved in person, mind and character that an old maid of to-day is wholly
different from an old maid of forty years ago.

[Illustration: CONVINCING HIS WIFE.]

{144}

When and Whom to Marry.

1. EARLY MARRIAGES.--Women too early married always remain small in
stature, weak, pale, emaciated, and more or less miserable. We have no
natural nor moral right to perpetuate unhealthy constitutions, therefore
women should not marry too young and take upon themselves the
responsibility, by producing a weak and feeble generation of children. It
is better not to consummate a marriage until a full development of body and
mind has taken place. A young woman of twenty-one to twenty-five, and a
young man of twenty-three to twenty-eight, are considered the right age in
order to produce an intelligent and healthy offspring. "First make the tree
good, then shall the fruit be good also."

2. If marriage is delayed too long in either sex, say from thirty to
forty-five, the offspring will often be puny and more liable to insanity,
idiocy, and other maladies.

3. PUBERTY.--This is the period when childhood passes from immaturity of
the sexual functions to maturity. Woman attains this state a year or two
sooner than man. In the hotter climates the period of puberty is from
twelve to fifteen years of age, while in cold climates, such as Russia, the
United States, and Canada, puberty is frequently delayed until the
seventeenth year.

4. DISEASED PARENTS.--We do the race a serious wrong in multiplying the
number of hereditary invalids. Whole families of children have fallen heir
to lives of misery and suffering by the indiscretion and poor judgment of
parents. No young man in the vigor of health should think for a moment of
marrying a girl who has the impress of consumption or other disease already
stamped upon her feeble constitution. It only multiplies his own suffering,
and brings no material happiness to his invalid wife. On the other hand, no
healthy, vigorous young woman ought to unite her destiny with a man, no
matter how much she adored him, who is not healthy and able to brave the
hardships of life. If a young man or young woman with feeble body cannot
find permanent relief either by medicine or change of climate, no thoughts
of marriage should be entertained. Courting a patient may be pleasant, but
a hard thing in married life to enjoy. The young lady who supposes that any
young man wishes to marry her for the sake of nursing her through life
makes a very grave mistake.

[Illustration: THE BASHFUL YOUNG COUPLE.
"A faint heart never won a fair lady."]

5. WHOM TO CHOOSE FOR A HUSBAND.--The choice of a husband requires the
coolest judgment and the most {146} vigilant sagacity. A true union based
on organic law is happiness, but let all remember that oil and water will
not mix; the lion will not lie down with the lamb, nor can ill-assorted
marriages be productive of aught but discord.

             "Let the woman take
  An elder than herself, so wears she to him--
  So sways she, rules in her husband's heart."

Look carefully at the disposition.--See that your intended spouse is
kind-hearted, generous, and willing to respect the opinions of others,
though not in sympathy with them. Don't marry a selfish tyrant who thinks
only of himself.

6. BE CAREFUL.--Don't marry an intemperate man with a view of reforming
him. Thousands have tried it and failed. Misery, sorrow and a very hell on
earth have been the consequences of too many such generous undertakings.

7. THE TRUE AND ONLY TEST which any man should look for in woman is modesty
in demeanor before marriage, absence both of assumed ignorance and
disagreeable familiarity, and a pure and religious frame of mind. Where
these are present, he need not doubt that he has a faithful and a chaste
wife.

8. MARRYING FIRST COUSINS is dangerous to offspring. The observation is
universal, the children of married first cousins are too often idiots,
insane, clump-footed, crippled, blind, or variously diseased. First cousins
are always sure to impart all the hereditary disease in both families to
their children. If both are healthy there is less danger.

9. DO NOT CHOOSE ONE TOO GOOD, or too far above you, lest the inferior
dissatisfying the superior, breed those discords which are worse than the
trials of a single life. Don't be too particular; for you might go farther
and fare worse. As far as you yourself are faulty, you should put up with
faults. Don't cheat a consort by getting one much better than you can give.
We are not in heaven yet, and must put up with their imperfections, and
instead of grumbling at them, be glad they are no worse; remembering that a
faulty one is a great deal better than none, if he loves you.

10. MARRYING FOR MONEY.--Those who seek only the society of those who can
boast of wealth will nine times out of ten suffer disappointment. Wealth
cannot manufacture true love nor money buy domestic happiness. Marry
because you love each other, and God will bless your home. A cottage with a
loving wife is worth more than a royal palace with a discontented and
unloving queen. {147}

11. DIFFERENCE IN AGE.--It is generally admitted that the husband should be
a few years older than the wife. The question seems to be how much
difference. Up to twenty-two those who propose marriage should be about the
same age; however, other things being equal, a difference of fifteen years
after the younger is twenty-five, need not prevent a marriage. A man of
forty-five may marry a woman of twenty-five much more safely than one of
thirty a girl below nineteen, because her mental sexuality is not as mature
as his, and again her natural coyness requires more delicate and
affectionate treatment than he is likely to bestow. A girl of twenty or
under should seldom if ever marry a man of thirty or over, because the love
of an elderly man for a girl is more parental than conjugal; while hers for
him is like that of a daughter to a father. He may pet, flatter and indulge
her as he would a grown-up daughter, yet all this is not genuine masculine
and feminine love, nor can she exert over him the influence every man
requires from his wife.

12. THE BEST TIME.--All things considered, we advise the male reader to
keep his desires in check till he is at least twenty-five, and the female
not to enter the pale of wedlock until she has attained the age of twenty.
After those periods, marriage is the proper sphere of action, and one in
which nearly every individual is called by nature to play his proper part.

13. SELECT CAREFULLY.--While character, health, accomplishments and social
position should be considered, yet one must not overlook mental
construction and physical conformation. The rule always to be followed in
choosing a life partner is _identity of taste and diversity of
temperament_. Another essential is that they be physically adapted to each
other. For example: The pelvis--that part of the anatomy containing all the
internal organs of gestation--is not only essential to beauty and symmetry,
but is a matter of vital importance to her who contemplates matrimony, and
its usual consequences. Therefore, the woman with a very narrow and
contracted pelvis should never choose a man of giant physical development
lest they cannot duly realize the most important of the enjoyments of the
marriage state, while the birth of large infants will impose upon her
intense labor pains, or even cost her her life. {148}

       *       *       *       *       *

CHOOSE INTELLECTUALLY--LOVE AFTERWARD.

[Illustration: Explaining the Necessity for a New Bonnet.]

1. LOVE.--Let it ever be remembered that love is one of the most sacred
elements of our nature, and the most dangerous with which to tamper. It is
a very beautiful and delicately contrived faculty, producing the most
delightful results, but easily thrown out of repair--like a tender plant,
the delicate fibers of which incline gradually to entwine themselves around
its beloved one, uniting two willing hearts by a thousand endearing ties,
and making of "twain one flesh"; but they are easily torn asunder, and then
adieu to the joys of connubial bliss! {149}

2. COURTING BY THE QUARTER.--This courting by the quarter, "here a little
and there a little," is one of the greatest evils of the day. This getting
a little in love with Julia, and then a little with Eliza, and a little
more with Mary,--this fashionable flirtation and coquetry of both sexes--is
ruinous to the domestic affections; besides, effectually preventing the
formation of true connubial love. I consider this dissipation of the
affections one of the greatest sins against Heaven, ourselves, and the one
trifled with, that can be committed.

3. FRITTERING AWAY AFFECTIONS.--Young men commence courting long before
they think of marrying, and where they entertain no thoughts of marriage.
They fritter away their own affections, and pride themselves on their
conquests over the female heart; triumphing in having so nicely fooled
them. They pursue this sinful course so far as to drive their pitiable
victims, one after another, from respectable society, who, becoming
disgraced, retaliate by heaping upon them all the indignities and
impositions which the fertile imagination of woman can invent or execute.

4. COURTING WITHOUT INTENDING TO MARRY.--Nearly all this wide-spread crime
and suffering connected with public and private licentiousness and
prostitution, has its origin in these unmeaning courtships--this premature
love--this blighting of the affections, and every young man who courts
without intending to marry, is throwing himself or his sweetheart into
_this hell upon earth_. And most of the blame rests on young men, because
they take the liberty of paying their addresses to the ladies and
discontinuing them, at pleasure, and thereby mainly cause this vice.

5. SETTING THEIR CAPS.--True, young ladies sometimes "set their caps,"
sometimes court very hard by their bewitching smiles and affectionate
manners; by the natural language of love, or that backward reclining and
affectionate roll of the head which expresses it; by their soft and
persuasive accents; by their low dresses, artificial forms, and many other
unnatural and affected ways and means of attracting attention and exciting
love; but women never court till they have been in love and experienced its
interruption, till their first and most tender fibres of love have been
frostbitten by disappointment. It is surely a sad condition of society.

[Illustration: "HASTY FAMILIARITY IS FRAUGHT WITH MANY DANGERS."]

6. TRAMPLING THE AFFECTIONS OF WOMEN.--But man is a self-privileged
character. He may not only violate the laws of his own social nature with
impunity, but he may even trample upon the affections of woman. He may even
carry {151} this sinful indulgence to almost any length, and yet be
caressed and smiled tenderly upon by woman; aye, even by virtuous woman. He
may call out, only to blast the glowing affections of one young lady after
another, and yet his addresses be cordially welcomed by others. Surely a
gentleman is at perfect liberty to pay his addresses, not only to a lady,
but even to the ladies, although he does not once entertain the thought of
marrying his sweet-heart, or, rather his victim. O, man, how depraved! O,
woman, how strangely blind to your own rights and interests!

7. AN INFALLIBLE SIGN.--An infallible sign that a young man's intentions
are improper, is his trying to excite your passions. If he loves you, he
will never appeal to that feeling, because he respects you too much for
that. And the woman who allows a man to take advantage of her just to
compel him to marry her, is lost and heartless in the last degree, and
utterly destitute of moral principle as well as virtue. A woman's riches is
her virtue, that gone she has lost all.

8. THE BEGINNING OF LICENTIOUSNESS.--Man it seldom drives from society. Do
what he may, woman, aye, virtuous and even pious woman rarely excludes him
from her list of visitors. But where is the point of propriety?--immoral
transgression should exclude either sex from respectable society. Is it
that one false step which now constitutes the boundary between virtue and
vice? Or rather, the discovery of that false step? Certainly not! but it is
all that leads to, and precedes and induces it. It is this courting without
marrying. This is the beginning of licentiousness, as well as its main,
procuring cause, and therefore infinitely worse than its consummation
merely.

9. SEARING THE SOCIAL AFFECTIONS.--He has seared his social affections so
deeply, so thoroughly, so effectually, that when, at last, he wishes to
marry, he is incapable of loving. He marries, but is necessarily
cold-hearted towards his wife, which of course renders her wretched, if not
jealous, and reverses the faculties of both towards each other; making both
most miserable for life. This induces contention and mutual recrimination,
if not unfaithfulness, and imbitters the marriage relations through life;
and well it may.

10. UNHAPPY MARRIAGES.--This very cause, besides inducing most of that
unblushing public and private prostitution already alluded to, renders a
large proportion of the marriages of the present day unhappy. Good people
mourn over the result, but do not once dream of its cause. They even pray
for moral reform, yet do the very things that increase the evil. {152}

[Illustration: AFTER THE ENGAGEMENT.]

11. WEEPING OVER HER FALLEN SON.--Do you see yonder godly mother, weeping
over her fallen son, and remonstrating with him in tones of a mother's
tenderness and importunity? That very mother prevented that very son
marrying the girl he dearly loved, because she was poor, and this
interruption of his love was the direct and procuring cause of his ruin;
for, if she had allowed him to marry this beloved one, he never would have
thought of giving his "strength unto strange women." True, the mother
ruined her son ignorantly, but none the less effectually.

12. SEDUCTION AND RUIN.--That son next courts another virtuous fair one,
engages her affections, and ruins her, or else leaves her broken-hearted,
so that she is the more easily ruined by others, and thus prepares the way
for her becoming an inmate of a house "whose steps take hold on hell." His
heart is now indifferent, he is ready for anything.

13. THE RIGHT PRINCIPLE.--I say then, with emphasis, that no man should
ever pay his addresses to any woman, until he has made his selection, not
even to aid him in making that choice. He should first make his selection
intellectually, and love afterward. He should go about the matter coolly
and with judgment, just as he would undertake any other important matter.
No man or woman, when blinded by love, is in a fit state to judge
advantageously as to what he or she requires, or who is adapted to his or
her wants.

14. CHOOSING FIRST AND LOVING AFTERWARDS.--I know, indeed, that this
doctrine of choosing first and loving afterward, of excluding love from the
councils, and of choosing by and with the consent of the intellect and
moral sentiments, is entirely at variance with the feelings of the young
and the customs of society; but, for its correctness, I appeal to the
common-sense--not to the experience, for so few try this plan. Is not this
the only proper method, and the one most likely to result happily? Try it.

15. THE YOUNG WOMAN'S CAUTION.--And, especially, let no young lady ever
once think of bestowing her affections till she is certain they will not be
broken off--that is, until the match is fully agreed upon; but rather let
her keep her heart whole till she bestows it for life. This requisition is
as much more important, and its violation as much more disastrous to woman
than to man, as her social faculties are stronger than his.

16. A BURNT CHILD DREADS THE FIRE.--As a "burnt child dreads the fire," and
the more it is burnt, the greater the dread: so your affections, once
interrupted, will recoil from a second love, and distrust all mankind. No!
you cannot be too choice of your love--that pivot on which turn your
destinies for life and future happiness.

       *       *       *       *       *


{154}

Love-Spats.

  For aught that ever I could read,
  Could ever hear by tale or history,
  The course of true love never did ran smooth."--SHAKESPEARE.

 "Heaven has no rage like love to hatred turned,
  Nor hell a fury like a woman scorned."--CONGREVE.

    "Thunderstorms clear the atmosphere and promote vegetation; then why
    not Love-spats promote love, as they certainly often do?

    They are almost universal, and in the nature of our differences cannot
    be helped. The more two love, the more they are aggrieved by each
    other's faults; of which these spats are but the correction.

    Love-spats instead of being universal, they are consequent on imperfect
    love, and only aggravate, never correct errors. Sexual storms never
    improve, whereas love obviates faults by praising the opposite virtues.
    Every view of them, practical and philosophical, condemns them as being
    to love what poison is to health, both before and after marriage. They
    are nothing but married discords. Every law of mind and love condemns
    them. Shun them as you would deadly vipers, and prevent them by
    forestallment."--O. S. Fowler.

       *       *       *       *       *

1. THE TRUE FACTS.--Notwithstanding some of the above quotations, to the
contrary, trouble and disagreement between lovers embitters both love and
life. Contention is always dangerous, and will beget alienation if not
final separation.

2. CONFIRMED AFFECTIONS.--Where affections are once thoroughly confirmed,
each one should be very careful in taking offense, and avoid all
disagreements as far as possible, but if disagreements continually develop
with more or less friction and irritation, it is better for the crisis to
come and a final separation take place. For peace is better than disunited
love.

[Illustration: CUPID'S REBELLION]

3. HATE-SPATS.--Hate-spats, though experienced by most lovers, yet, few
realize how fatal they are to subsequent affections. Love-spats develop
into hate-spats, and their effects upon the affections are blighting and
should not under any circumstances be tolerated. Either agree, or agree to
disagree. If there cannot be harmony before the ties of marriage are
assumed, then there cannot be harmony {156} after. Married life will be
continually marred by a series of "hate-spats" that sooner or later will
destroy all happiness, unless the couple are reasonably well mated.

4. MORE FATAL THE OFTENER THEY OCCUR.--As O. S. Fowler says: "'The poison
of asps is under their lips.' The first spat is like a deep gash cut into a
beautiful face, rendering it ghastly, and leaving a fearful scar, which
neither time nor cosmetics can ever efface; including that pain so fatal to
love, and blotting that sacred love-page with memory's most hideous and
imperishable visages. Cannot many now unhappy remember them as the
beginning of that alienation which embittered your subsequent affectional
cup, and spoiled your lives? With what inherent repulsion do you look back
upon them? Their memory is horrid, and effect on love most destructive."

5. FATAL CONDITIONS.--What are all lovers' "spats" but disappointment in
its very worst form? They necessarily and always produce all its terrible
consequences. The finer feelings and sensibilities will soon become
destroyed and nothing but hatred will remain.

6. EXTREME SORROW.--After a serious "spat" there generally follows a period
of tender sorrow, and a feeling of humiliation and submission. Mutual
promises are consequently made that such a condition of things shall never
happen again, etc. But be sure and remember, that every subsequent
difficulty will require stronger efforts to repair the breach. Let it be
understood that these compromises are dangerous, and every new difficulty
increases their fatality. Even the strongest will endure but few, nor
survive many.

7. DISTRUST AND WANT OF CONFIDENCE.--Most difficulties arise from distrust
or lack of confidence or common-sense. When two lovers eye each other like
two curs, each watching, lest the other should gain some new advantage,
then this shows a lack of common-sense, and the young couple should get
sensible or separate.

8. JEALOUSY.--When one of the lovers, once so tender, now all at once so
cold and hardened; once so coy and familiar, now suddenly so reserved,
distant, hard and austere, is always a sure case of jealousy. A jealous
person is first talkative, very affectionate, and then all at once changes
and becomes cold, reserved and repulsive, apparently without cause. If a
person is jealous before marriage, this characteristic will be increased
rather than diminished by marriage. {157}

9. CONFESSION.--If you make up by confession, the confessor feels mean and
disgraced; or if both confess and forgive, both feel humbled; since
forgiveness implies inferiority and pity; from which whatever is manly and
womanly shrinks. Still even this is better than continued "spats."

10. PREVENTION.--If you can get along well in your courtship you will
invariably make a happy couple if you should unite your destinies in
marriage. Learn not to give nor take offence. You must remember that all
humanity is imperfect at best. We all have our faults, and must keep them
in subordination. Those who truly love each other will have but few
difficulties in their courtship or in married life.

11. REMEDIES.--Establishing a perfect love in the beginning constitutes a
preventive. Fear that they are not truly loved usually paves the way for
"spats." Let all who make any pretension guard against all beginnings of
this reversal, and strangle these "hate-spats" the moment they arise. "Let
not the sun go down upon thy wrath," not even an hour, but let the next
sentence after they begin quench them forever. And let those who cannot
court without "spats," stop; for those who spat before marriage, must
quarrel after.

[Illustration: "Let not the sun go down upon thy wrath."]

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *


{159}

A Broken Heart.

[Illustration: A BROKEN HEART]

1. WOUNDED LOVE.--Tis true that love wields a magic, sovereign, absolute,
and tyrannical power over both the body and the mind when it is given
control. It often, in case of disappointment, works havoc and deals death
blows to its victims, and leaves many in that morbid mental condition which
no life-tonics simply can restore. Wounded love may be the result of hasty
and indiscreet conduct of young people; or the outgrowth of lust, or the
result of domestic infidelity and discord.

2. FATAL EFFECTS.--Our cemeteries receive within the cold shadows of the
grave thousands and thousands of victims that annually die from the results
of "broken hearts." It is no doubt a fact that love troubles cause more
disorders of the heart than everything else combined.

3. DISRUPTED LOVE.--It has long been known that dogs, birds, and even
horses, when separated from their companions or friends, have pined away
and died; so it is not strange that man with his higher intuitive ideas of
affection should suffer from love when suddenly disrupted.

4. CRUCIFYING LOVE.--Painful love feelings strike right to the heart, and
the breaking up of love that cannot be consummated in marriage is sometimes
allowed to crucify the affections. There is no doubt that the suffering
from disappointed love is often deeper and more intense than meeting death
itself.

5. HEALING.--The paralyzing and agonizing consequences of ruptured love can
only be remedied by diversion and society. Bring the mind into a state of
patriotic independence with a full determination to blot out the past.
Those who cannot bring into subordination the pangs of disappointment in
love are not strong characters, and invariably will suffer disappointments
in almost every department of life. Disappointment in love means rising
above it, and conquering it, or demoralization, mental, physical and
sexual.

6. LOVE RUNS MAD.--Love comes unbidden. A blind ungovernable impulse seems
to hold sway in the passions of the affections. Love is blind and seems to
completely subdue and conquer. It often comes like a clap of thunder from a
clear sky, and when it falls it falls flat, leaving only the ruins of a
tornado behind.

7. BAD, DISMAL, AND BLUE FEELINGS.--Despondency breathes disease, and those
who yield to it can neither work, eat nor sleep; they only suffer. The
spell-bound, fascinated, magnetized affections seem to deaden self-control
and no {160} doubt many suffering from love-sickness are totally helpless;
they are beside themselves, irritational and wild. Men and women of genius,
influence and education, all seem to suffer alike, but they do not yield
alike to the subduing influence; some pine away and die; others rise above
it, and are the stronger and better for having been afflicted.

8. RISE ABOVE IT.--Cheer up! If you cannot think pleasurably over your
misfortune, forget it. You must do this or perish. Your power and influence
is too much to blight by foolish and melancholicy pining. Your own sense,
your self-respect, your self-love, your love for others, command you not to
spoil yourself by crying over "spilt milk."

[Illustration: MARRIAGE ON A DEATHBED.]

9. RETRIEVE YOUR PAST LOSS.--Do sun, moon, and stars indeed rise and set in
your loved one? Are there not "as good fish in the sea as ever were
caught?" and can you not catch them? Are there not other hearts on earth
just as loving and lovely, and in every way as congenial? If circumstances
had first turned you upon another, you would have felt about that one as
now about this. Love depends far less on the party loved than on the loving
one. Or is this the way either to retrieve your past loss, or provide for
the future? Is it not both unwise and self-destructive; and in every way
calculated to render your case, present and prospective, still more
hopeless?

10. FIND SOMETHING TO DO.--Idle hands are Satan's workshop. Employ your
mind; find something to do; something in which you can find
self-improvement; something that will fit you better to be admired by
someone else, read, and improve your mind; get into society, throw your
whole soul into some new enterprise, and you will conquer with glory and
come out of the fire purified and made more worthy.

11. LOVE AGAIN.--As love was the cause of your suffering, so love again
will restore you, and you will love better and more consistently. Do not
allow yourself to become soured and detest and shun association. Rebuild
your dilapidated sexuality by cultivating a general appreciation of the
excellence, especially of the mental and moral qualities of the opposite
sex. Conquer your prejudices, and vow not to allow anyone to annoy or
disturb your calmness.

12. LOVE FOR THE DEAD.--A most affectionate woman, who continues to love
her affianced though long dead, instead of becoming soured or deadened,
manifests all the richness and sweetness of the fully-developed woman
thoroughly in love, along with a softened, mellow, twilight sadness which
touches every heart, yet throws a peculiar lustre and beauty over her
manners and entire character. She must mourn, {161} but not forever. It is
not her duty to herself or to her Creator.

13. A SURE REMEDY.--Come in contact with the other sex. You are infused
with your lover's magnetism, which must remain till displaced by another's.
Go to parties and picnics; be free, familiar, offhand, even forward; try
your knack at fascinating another, and yield to fascinations yourself. But
be honest, command respect, and make yourself attractive and worthy.

       *       *       *       *       *


{162}

Former Customs and Peculiarities Among Men.

1. POLYGAMY.--There is a wide difference as regards the relations of the
sexes in different parts of the world. In some parts polygamy has prevailed
from time immemorial.

Most savage people are polygamists, and the Turks, though slowly departing
from the practice, still allow themselves a plurality of wives.

2. RULE REVERSED.--In Thibet the rule is reversed, and the females are
provided with two or more husbands. It is said that in many instances a
whole family of brothers have but one wife. The custom has at least one
advantageous feature, viz.: the possibility of leaving an unprotected widow
and a number of fatherless children is entirely obviated.

3. THE MORGANATIC MARRIAGE is a modification of polygamy. It sometimes
occurs among the royalty of Europe, and is regarded as perfectly
legitimate, but the morganatic wife is of lower rank than her royal
husband, and her children do not inherit his rank or fortune. The Queen
only is the consort of the sovereign, and entitled to share his rank.

4. DIFFERENT MANNERS OF OBTAINING WIVES.--Among the uncivilized almost any
envied possession is taken by brute force or superior strength. The same is
true in obtaining a wife. The strong take precedence of the weak. It is
said that among the North American Indians it was the custom for men to
wrestle for the choice of women. A weak man could seldom retain a wife that
a strong man coveted.

The law of contest was not confined to individuals alone. Women were
frequently the cause of whole tribes arraying themselves against each other
in battle. The effort to excel in physical power was a great incentive to
bodily development, and since the best of the men were preferred by the
most superior women, the custom was a good one in this, that the race was
improved.

5. THE ABORIGINAL AUSTRALIAN employed low cunning and heartless cruelty in
obtaining his wife. Laying in ambush, with club in hand, he would watch for
the coveted woman, {163} and, unawares, spring upon her. If simply disabled
he carried her off as his possession, but if the blow had been hard enough
to kill, he abandoned her to watch for another victim. There is here no
effort to attract or please, no contest of strength; his courtship, if
courtship it can be called, would compare very unfavorably with any among
the brute creation.

6. THE KALMUCK TARTAR races for his bride on horseback, she having a
certain start previously agreed upon. The _nuptial knot_ consists in
catching her, but we are told that the result of the race all depends upon
whether the girl wants to be caught or not.

7. SANDWICH ISLANDERS.--Marriage among the early natives of these islands
was merely a matter of mutual inclination. There was no ceremony at all,
the men and women united and separated as they felt disposed.

8. THE FEUDAL LORD, in various parts of Europe, when any of his dependents
or followers married, exercised the right of assuming the bridegroom's
proper place in the marriage couch for the first night. Seldom was there
any escape from this abominable practice. Sometimes the husband, if
wealthy, succeeded in buying off the petty sovereign from exercising his
privilege.

9. THE SPARTANS had the custom of encouraging intercourse between their
best men and women for the sake of a superior progeny, without any
reference to a marriage ceremony. Records show that the ancient Roman
husband has been known to invite a friend, in whom he may have admired some
physical or mental trait, to share the favors of his wife, that the
peculiar qualities that he admired might be repeated in the offspring.

[Illustration]

{164}

[Illustration: The Peasant Father Blessing His Daughter at Her Engagement.]

       *       *       *       *       *


{165}

[Illustration]

    Hasty marriage seldom proveth well.--_Shakespere, Henry VI._

    The reason why so few marriages are happy is, because young ladies
    spend their time in making nets, not in making cages.--_Swift, Thoughts
    on Various Subjects._

       *       *       *       *       *

Sensible Hints in Choosing a Partner.

1. There are many fatal errors and many love-making failures in courtship.
Natural laws govern all nature and reduce all they govern to eternal right;
therefore love naturally, not artificially. Don't love a somebody or a
nobody simply because they have money.

2. COURT SCIENTIFICALLY.--If you court at all, court scientifically. Bungle
whatever else you will, but do not bungle courtship. A failure in this may
mean more than a loss of wealth or public honors; it may mean ruin, or a
life often worse than death. The world is full of wretched and mismated
people.

BEGIN RIGHT and all will be right; begin wrong and all will end wrong. When
you court, make a business of it and study your interest the same as you
would study any other business proposition.

3. DIVORCES.--There is not a divorce on our court records that is not the
result of some fundamental error in courtship. The purity or the power of
love may be corrupted the same as any other faculty, and when a man makes
up his mind to marry and shuts his eyes and grabs in the dark for a
companion, he dishonors the woman he captures and commits a crime against
God and society. In this enlightened age there should be comparatively few
mistakes made in the selection of a suitable partner. Sufficient time
should be taken to study each other's character and disposition.
Association will soon reveal adaptability.

4. FALSE LOVE.--Many a poor, blind and infatuated novice thinks he is
desperately in love, when there is not the least genuine affection in his
nature. It is all a momentary {166} passion, a sort of puppy love; his vows
and pledges are soon violated, and in wedlock he will become indifferent
and cold to his wife and children, and he will go through life without
ambition, encouragement or success. He will be a failure. True love speaks
for itself, and the casual observer can read its proclamations. True love
does not speak in a whisper. It always makes itself heard. The follies of
flirting develop into many unhappy marriages, and blight many a life. A man
happily married has superior advantages both socially and financially.

5. FLIRTING JUST FOR FUN.--Who is the flirt, what is his reputation,
motive, or character? Every young man and woman must have a reputation; if
it is not good it is bad, there is no middle ground. Young people who are
running in the streets after dark, boisterous and noisy in their
conversation, gossiping and giggling, flirting with first one and then
another, will soon settle their matrimonial prospects among good society.
Modesty is a priceless jewel. No sensible young man with a future will
marry a flirt.

6. THE ARCH-DECEIVER.--They who win the affection simply for their own
amusement are committing a great sin for which there is no adequate
punishment. How can you shipwreck the innocent life of that confiding
maiden, how can you forget her happy looks as she drank in your expressions
of love, how can you forget her melting eyes and glowing cheeks, her tender
tone reciprocating your pretended love? Remember that God is infinitely
just, and "the soul that sinneth shall surely die." You may dash into
business, seek pleasure in the club room, and visit gambling hells, but
"Thou art the man" will ever stare you in the face. Her pale, sad cheeks,
her hollow eyes will never cease to haunt you. Men should promote
happiness, and not cause misery. Let the savage Indians torture captives to
death by the slow flaming fagot, but let civilized man respect the
tenderness and love of confiding women. Torturing the opposite sex is
double-distilled barbarity. Young men agonizing young ladies, is the
cold-blooded cruelty of devils, not men.

7. THE RULE TO FOLLOW.--Do not continually pay your attentions to the same
lady if you have no desire to win her affections. Occasionally escorting
her to church, concert, picnic, party, etc., is perfectly proper; but to
give her your special attention, and extend invitations to her for all
places of amusements where you care to attend, is an implied promise that
you prefer her company above all others, and she has a right to believe
that your attentions are serious. {167}

[Illustration: THE WEDDING RING.]

8. EVERY GIRL SHOULD SEAL HER HEART against all manifested affections,
unless they are accompanied by a proposal. Woman's love is her all, and her
heart should be as flint until she finds one who is worthy of her
confidence. Young woman, never bestow your affections until by some word or
deed at least you are fully justified in recognizing sincerity and faith in
him who is paying you special attention. Better not be engaged until
twenty-two. You are {168} then more competent to judge the honesty and
falsity of man. Nature has thrown a wall of maidenly modesty around you.
Preserve that and not let your affections be trifled with while too young
by any youthful flirt who is in search of hearts to conquer.

9. FEMALE FLIRTATION.--The young man who loves a young woman has paid her
the highest compliment in the possession of man. Perpetrate almost any sin,
inflict any other torture, but spare him the agony of disappointment. It is
a crime that can never be forgiven, and a debt that never can be paid.

10. LOYALTY.--Young persons with serious intentions, or those who are
engaged should be thoroughly loyal to each other. If they seek freedom with
others the flame of jealousy is likely to be kindled and love is often
turned to hatred, and the severest anger of the soul is aroused. Loyalty,
faithfulness, confidence, are the three jewels to be cherished in
courtship. Don't be a flirt.

11. KISSING, FONDLING, AND CARESSING BETWEEN LOVERS.--This should never be
tolerated under any circumstances, unless there is an engagement to justify
it, and then only in a sensible and limited way. The girl who allows a
young man the privilege of kissing her or putting his arms around her waist
before engagement will at once fall in the estimation of the man she has
thus gratified and desired to please. Privileges always injure, but never
benefit.

[Illustration: SAYING "NO" WHEN MEANING "YES."]

12. IMPROPER LIBERTIES DURING COURTSHIP KILL LOVE.--Any improper liberties
which are permitted by young ladies, whether engaged or not, will change
love into sensuality, and her affections will become obnoxious, if not
repellent. Men by nature love virtue, and for a life companion naturally
shun an amorous woman. Young folks, as you love moral purity and virtue,
never reciprocate love until you have required the right of betrothal.
Remember that those who are thoroughly in love will respect the honor and
virtue of each other. The purity of woman is doubly attractive, and
sensuality in her becomes doubly offensive and repellent. It is contrary to
the laws of nature for a man to love a harlot.

13. A SEDUCER.--The punishment of the seducer is best given by O. S.
Fowler, in his "Creative Science." The sin and punishment rest on all you
who call out only to blight a trusting, innocent, loving virgin's
affections, and then discard her. You deserve to be horsewhipped by her
father, cowhided by her brothers, branded villain by her mother, cursed by
herself, and sent to the whipping-post and dungeon. {169}

14. CAUTION.--A young lady should never encourage the attentions of a young
man, who shows no interest in his sisters. If a young man is indifferent to
his sisters he will become indifferent to his wife as soon as the honey
moon is over. There are few if any exceptions to this rule. The brother who
will not be kind and loving in his mother's home will make a very poor
husband.

15. THE OLD RULE: "Never marry a man that does not make his mother a
Christmas present every Christmas," is a good one. The young lady makes no
mistake in uniting her destinies with the man that loves his mother and
respects his sisters and brothers.

       *       *       *       *       *


{170}

SAFE HINTS.

[Illustration: A CHINESE BRIDE AND GROOM.]

1. Marry in your own position in life. If there is any difference in social
position, it is better that the husband should be the superior. A woman
does not like to look down upon her husband, and to be obliged to do so is
a poor guarantee for their happiness.

2. It is best to marry persons of your own faith and religious convictions,
unless one is willing to adopt those of the other. Difference of faith is
apt to divide families, and to produce great trouble in after life. A pious
woman should beware of marrying an irreligious man. {171}

3. Don't be afraid of marrying a poor man or woman. Good health, cheerful
disposition, stout hearts and industrious hands will bring happiness and
comfort.

4. Bright red hair should marry jet black, and jet black auburn or bright
red, etc. And the more red-faced and bearded or impulsive a man, the more
dark, calm, cool and quiet should his wife be; and vice versa. The florid
should not marry the florid, but those who are dark, in proportion as they
themselves are light.

5. Red-whiskered men should marry brunettes, but no blondes; the color of
the whiskers being more determinate of the temperament than that of the
hair.

6. The color of the eyes is still more important. Gray eyes must marry some
other color, almost any other except gray; and so of blue, dark, hazel,
etc.

7. Those very fleshy should not marry those equally so, but those too spare
and slim; and this is doubly true of females. A spare man is much better
adapted to a fleshy woman than a round-favored man. Two who are short,
thick-set and stocky, should not unite in marriage, but should choose those
differently constituted; but on no account one of their own make. And, in
general, those predisposed to corpulence are therefore less inclined to
marriage.

8. Those with little hair or beard should marry those whose hair is
naturally abundant; still those who once had plenty, but who have lost it,
may marry those who are either bald or have but little; for in this, as in
all other cases, all depends on what one is by nature, little on present
states.

9. Those whose motive-temperament decidedly predominates, who are bony,
only moderately fleshy, quite prominent-featured, Roman-nosed and muscular,
should not marry those similarly formed.

10. Small, nervous men must not marry little, nervous or sanguine women,
lest both they and their children have quite too much of the hot-headed and
impulsive, and die suddenly.

[Illustration: Light, Life, Health and Beauty.]

11. Two very beautiful persons rarely do or should marry; nor two extra
homely. The fact is a little singular that very handsome women, who of
course can have their pick, rarely marry good-looking men, but generally
give preference to those who are homely; because that {173} exquisiteness
in which beauty originates naturally blends with that power which
accompanies huge noses and disproportionate features.

12. Rapid movers, speakers, laughers, etc., should marry those who are calm
and deliberate, and impulsives those who are stoical; while those who are
medium may marry those who are either or neither, as they prefer.

13. Noses indicate characters by indicating the organisms and temperaments.
Accordingly, those noses especially marked either way should marry those
having opposite nasal characteristics. Roman noses are adapted to those
which turn up, and pug noses to those turning down; while straight noses
may marry either.

14. Men who love to command must be especially careful not to marry
imperious, women's-rights woman; while those who willingly "obey order;"
need just such. Some men require a wife who shall take their part; yet all
who do not need strong-willed women, should be careful how they marry them.

15. A sensible woman should not marry an obstinate but injudicious,
unintelligent man; because she cannot long endure to see and help him
blindly follow his poor, but spurn her good, plans.

16. The reserved or secretive should marry the frank. A cunning man cannot
endure the least artifice in a wife. Those who are non-committal must marry
those who are demonstrative; else, however much they may love, neither will
feel sure as to the other's affections, and each will distrust the other,
while their children will be deceitful.

17. A timid woman should never marry a hesitating man, lest, like
frightened children, each keep perpetually re-alarming the other by
imaginary fears.

18. An industrious, thrifty, hard-working man should marry a woman
tolerably saving and industrious. As the "almighty dollar" is now the great
motor-wheel of humanity, and that to which most husbands devote their
entire lives, to delve alone is uphill work.

[Illustration]

{174}

Marriage Securities.

[Illustration: WE MUST PART.]

1. SEEK EACH OTHER'S HAPPINESS.--A selfish marriage that seeks only its own
happiness defeats itself. Happiness is a fire that will not burn long on
one stick. {175}

2. DO NOT MARRY SUDDENLY.--It can always be done till it is done, if it is
a proper thing to do.

3. MARRY IN YOUR OWN GRADE IN SOCIETY.--It is painful to be always
apologizing for any one. It is more painful to be apologized for.

4. DO NOT MARRY DOWNWARD.--It is hard enough to advance in the quality of
life without being loaded with clay heavier than your own. It will be
sufficiently difficult to keep your children up to your best level without
having to correct a bias in their blood.

5. DO NOT SELL YOURSELF.--It matters not whether the price be money or
position.

6. DO NOT THROW YOURSELF AWAY.--You will not receive too much, even if you
are paid full price.

7. SEEK THE ADVICE OF YOUR PARENTS.--Your parents are your best friends.
They will make more sacrifice for you than any other mortals. They are
elevated above selfishness concerning you. If they differ from you
concerning your choice, it is because they must.

8. DO NOT MARRY TO PLEASE ANY THIRD PARTY.--You must do the living and
enduring.

9. DO NOT MARRY TO SPITE ANYBODY.--It would add wretchedness to folly.

10. DO NOT MARRY BECAUSE SOMEONE ELSE MAY SEEK THE SAME HAND.--One glove
may not fit all hands equally well.

11. DO NOT MARRY TO GET RID OF ANYBODY.--The coward who shot himself to
escape from being drafted was insane.

12. DO NOT MARRY MERELY FOR THE IMPULSE OF LOVE.--Love is a principle as
well as an emotion. So far as it is a sentiment it is a blind guide. It
does not wait to test the presence of exalted character in its object
before breaking out into a flame. Shavings make a hot fire, but hard coal
is better for the Winter.

13. DO NOT MARRY WITHOUT LOVE.--A body without a soul soon becomes
offensive.

14. TEST CAREFULLY THE EFFECT OF PROTRACTED ASSOCIATION.--If familiarity
breeds contempt before marriage it will afterward.

15. TEST CAREFULLY THE EFFECT OF PROTRACTED SEPARATION.--True love will
defy both time and space.

16. CONSIDER CAREFULLY the right of your children under the laws of
heredity. It is doubtful whether you have a right to increase the number of
invalids and cripples.

17. DO NOT MARRY SIMPLY BECAUSE YOU HAVE PROMISED TO DO SO.--If a seam
opens between you now it will widen into {176} a gulf. It is less offensive
to retract a mistaken promise than to perjure your soul before the altar.
Your intended spouse has a right to absolute integrity.

[Illustration: GOING TO BE MARRIED.]

18. MARRY CHARACTER.--It is not so much what one has as what one is.

19. DO NOT MARRY THE WRONG OBJECT.--Themistocles said he would rather marry
his daughter to a man without {177} money than to money without a man. It
is well to have both. It is fatal to have neither.

20. DEMAND A JUST RETURN.--You give virtue and purity, and gentleness and
integrity. You have a right to demand the same in return. Duty requires it.

21. REQUIRE BRAINS.--Culture is good, but will not be transmitted. Brain
power may be.

22. STUDY PAST RELATIONSHIP.--The good daughter and sister makes a good
wife. The good son and brother makes a good husband.

23. NEVER MARRY AS A MISSIONARY DEED.--If one needs saving from bad habits
he is not suitable for you.

24. MARRIAGE IS A SURE AND SPECIFIC REMEDY for all the ills known as
seminal losses. As right eating cures a sick stomach and right breathing
diseased lungs, so the right use of the sexual organs will bring relief and
restoration. Many men who have been sufferers from indiscretions of youth,
have married, and were soon cured of spermatorrhoea and other complications
which accompanied it.

25. A GOOD, LONG COURTSHIP will often cure many difficulties or ills of the
sexual organs. O. S. Fowler says: "See each other often spend many pleasant
hours together," have many walks and talks, think of each other while
absent, write many love letters, be inspired to many love feelings and acts
towards each other, and exercise your sexuality in a thousand forms ten
thousand times, every one of which tones up and thereby recuperates this
very element now dilapidated. When you have courted long enough to marry,
you will be sufficiently restored to be reimproved by it. Come,

UP AND AT IT.--Dress up, spruce up, and be on the alert. Don't wait too
long to get one much more perfect than you are; but settle on some one
soon. Remember that your unsexed state renders you over-dainty, and easily
disgusted. So contemplate only their lovable qualities.

26. PURITY OF PURPOSE.--Court with a pure and loyal purpose, and when
thoroughly convinced that the disposition of other difficulties are in the
way of a happy marriage life, then _honorably_ discuss it and honorably
treat each other in the settlement.

27. DO NOT TRIFLE with the feelings or affections of each other. It is a
sin that will curse you all the days of your life.

       *       *       *       *       *


{178}

Women Who Make the Best Wives.

1. CONSCIOUS OF THE DUTIES OF HER SEX.--A woman conscious of the duties of
her sex, one who unflinchingly discharges the duties allotted to her by
nature, would no doubt make a good wife.

2. GOOD WIVES AND MOTHERS.--The good wives and mothers are the women who
believe in the sisterhood of women as well as in the brotherhood of men.
The highest exponent of this type seeks to make her home something more
than an abode where children are fed, clothed and taught the catechism. The
State has taken her children into politics by making their education a
function of politicians. The good wife and homemaker says to her children,
"Where thou goest, I will go." She puts off her own inclinations to ease
and selfishness. She studies the men who propose to educate her children;
she exhorts mothers to sit beside fathers on the school-board; she will
even herself accept such thankless office in the interests of the helpless
youth of the schools who need a mother's as well as a father's and a
teacher's care in this field of politics.

3. A BUSY WOMAN.--As to whether a busy woman, that is, a woman who labors
for mankind in the world outside her home,--whether such an one can also be
a good housekeeper, and care for her children, and make a real "Home, Sweet
Home!" with all the comforts by way of variation, why! I am ready, as the
result of years practical experience as a busy woman, to assert that women
of affairs can also be women of true domestic tastes and habits.

4. BRAINY ENOUGH.--What kind of women make the best wives? The woman who is
brainy enough to be a companion, wise enough to be a counsellor, skilled
enough in the domestic virtues to be a good housekeeper, and loving enough
to guide in true paths the children with whom the home may be blessed.

5. FOUND THE RIGHT HUSBAND.--The best wife is the woman who has found the
right husband, a husband who understands her. A man will have the best wife
when he rates that wife as queen among women. Of all women she should
always be to him the dearest. This sort of man will not only praise the
dishes made by his wife, but will actually eat them.

[Illustration: PUNISHMENT OF WIFE BEATERS IN NEW ENGLAND IN THE EARLY
DAYS.]

6. BANK ACCOUNT.--He will allow his life-companion a bank account, and will
exact no itemized bill at the end of the month. Above all, he will pay the
Easter bonnet bill without a word, never bring a friend to dinner without
first telephoning home,--short, he will comprehend that the {180} woman who
makes the best wife is the woman whom, by his indulgence of her ways and
whims, he makes the best wife. So after all, good husbands have the most to
do with making good wives.

7. BEST HOME MAKER.--A woman to be the best home maker needs to be devoid
of intensive "nerves." She must be neat and systematic, but not too neat,
lest she destroy the comfort she endeavors to create. She must be
distinctly amiable, while firm. She should have no "career," or desire for
a career, if she would fill to perfection the home sphere. She must be
affectionate, sympathetic and patient, and fully appreciative of the worth
and dignity of her sphere.

8. KNOW NOTHING WHATSOEVER ABOUT COOKING OR SEWING OR HOUSEKEEPING.--I am
inclined to make my answer to this question somewhat concise, after the
manner of a text without the sermon. Like this: To be the "best wife"
depends upon three things: first, an abiding faith with God; second, duty
lovingly discharged as daughter, wife and mother; third, self-improvement,
mentally, physically, spiritually. With this as a text and as a glittering
generality, let me touch upon one or two practical essentials. In the
course of every week it is my privilege to meet hundreds of young
women,--prospective wives. I am astonished to find that many of these know
nothing whatsoever about cooking or sewing or housekeeping. Now, if a woman
cannot broil a beefsteak, nor boil the coffee when it is necessary, if she
cannot mend the linen, nor patch a coat, if she cannot make a bed, order
the dinner, create a lamp-shade, ventilate the house, nor do anything
practical in the way of making home actually a home, how can she expect to
make even a good wife, not to speak of a better or best wife? I need not
continue this sermon. Wise girls will understand.

9. THE BEST KEEPER OF HOME.--As to who is the best keeper of this
transition home, memory pictures to me a woman grown white under the old
slavery, still bound by it, in that little-out-of-the-way Kansas town, but
never so bound that she could not put aside household tasks, at any time,
for social intercourse, for religious conversation, for correspondence, for
reading, and, above all, for making everyone who came near her feel that
her home was the expression of herself, a place for rest, study, and the
cultivation of affection. She did not exist for her walls, her carpets, her
furniture; they existed for her and all who came to her. She considered
herself the equal of all; and everyone else thought her the superior of
all.

       *       *       *       *       *


{181}

Adaptation, Conjugal Affection, and Fatal Errors.

       *       *       *       *       *

ADVICE TO THE MARRIED AND UNMARRIED.

1. MARRYING FOR WEALTH.--Those who marry for wealth often get what they
marry and nothing else; for rich girls, besides being generally destitute
of both industry and economy, are generally extravagant in their
expenditures, and require servants enough to dissipate a fortune. They
generally have insatiable wants, yet feel that they deserve to be indulged
in everything, because they placed their husbands under obligation to them
by bringing them a dowry. And then the mere idea of living on the money of
a wife, and of being supported by her, is enough to tantalize any man of an
independent spirit.

2. SELF-SUPPORT.--What spirited husband would not prefer to support both
himself and wife, rather than submit to this perpetual bondage of
obligation. To live upon a father, or take a patrimony from him, is quite
bad enough; but to run in debt to a wife, and owe her a living, is a little
too aggravating for endurance, especially if there be not perfect
cordiality between the two, which cannot be the case in money matches.
Better live wifeless, or anything else, rather than marry for money.

3. MONEY-SEEKERS.--Shame on sordid wife-seekers, or, rather, money-seekers;
for it is not a wife that they seek, but only filthy lucre! They violate
all their other faculties simply to gratify miserly desire. Verily such
"have their reward"!

4. THE PENITENT HOUR.--And to you, young ladies, let me say with great
emphasis, that those who court and marry you because you are rich, will
make you rue the day of your pecuniary espousals. They care not for you,
but only your money, and when they get that, will be liable to neglect or
abuse you, and probably squander it, leaving you destitute and abandoning
you to your fate.

5. INDUSTRY THE SIGN OF NOBILITY.--Marry a working, industrious young lady,
whose constitution is strong, flesh solid, and health unimpaired by
confinement, bad habits, or late hours. Give me a plain, home-spun farmer's
daughter, and you may have all the rich and fashionable belles of our
cities and villages.

[Illustration: AN ILL-MATED COUPLE.]

6. WASP WAISTS.--Marrying small waists is attended with consequences
scarcely less disastrous than marrying {183} rich and fashionable girls. An
amply developed chest is a sure indication of a naturally vigorous
constitution and a strong hold on life; while small waists indicate small
and feeble vital organs, a delicate constitution, sickly offspring, and a
short life. Beware of them, therefore, unless you wish your heart broken by
the early death of your wife and children.

7. MARRYING TALKERS.--In marrying a wit or a talker merely, though the
brilliant scintillations of the former, or the garrulity of the latter, may
amuse or delight you for the time being, yet you will derive no permanent
satisfaction from these qualities, for there will be no common bond of
kindred feeling to assimilate your souls and hold each spell-bound at the
shrine of the other's intellectual or moral excellence.

8. THE SECOND WIFE.--Many men, especially in choosing a second wife, are
governed by her own qualifications as a housekeeper mainly, and marry
industry and economy. Though these traits of character are excellent, yet a
good housekeeper may be far from being a good wife. A good housekeeper, but
a poor wife, may indeed prepare you a good dinner, and keep her house and
children neat and tidy, yet this is but a part of the office of a wife;
who, besides all her household duties, has those of a far higher order to
perform. She should soothe you with her sympathies, divert your troubled
mind, and make the whole family happy by the gentleness of her manners, and
the native goodness of her heart. A husband should also likewise do his
part.

9. DO NOT MARRY A MAN WITH A LOW, FLAT HEAD; for, however fascinating,
genteel, polite, tender, plausible or winning he may be, you will repent
the day of your espousal.

10. HEALTHY WIVES AND MOTHERS.--Let girls romp, and let them range hill and
dale in search of flowers, berries, or any other object of amusement or
attraction; let them bathe often, skip the rope, and take a smart ride on
horseback; often interspersing these amusements with a turn of sweeping or
washing, in order thereby to develop their vital organs, and thus lay a
substantial physical foundation for becoming good wives and mothers. The
wildest romps usually make the best wives, while quiet, still, demure,
sedate and sedentary girls are not worth having.

11. SMALL STATURE.--In passing, I will just remark, that good size is
important in wives and mothers. A small stature is objectionable in a
woman, because little women {184} usually have too much activity for their
strength, and, consequently, feeble constitutions; hence they die young,
and besides, being nervous, suffer extremely as mothers.

12. HARD TIMES AND MATRIMONY.--Many persons, particularly young men, refuse
to marry, especially "these hard times," because they cannot support a wife
in the style they wish. To this I reply, that a good wife will care less
for the style in which she is supported, than for you. She will cheerfully
conform to your necessities, and be happy with you in a log-cabin. She will
even help you support yourself. To support a good wife, even if she have
children, is really less expensive than to board alone, besides being one
of the surest means of acquiring property.

13. MARRYING FOR A HOME.--Do not, however, marry for a home merely, unless
you wish to become even more destitute with one than without one; for, it
is on the same footing with "marrying for money." Marry a man for his
merit, and you take no chances.

14. MARRY TO PLEASE NO ONE BUT YOURSELF.--Marriage is a matter exclusively
your own; because you alone must abide its consequences. No person, not
even a parent, has the least right to interfere or dictate in this matter.
I never knew a marriage, made to please another, to turn out any otherwise
than most unhappily.

15. DO NOT MARRY TO PLEASE YOUR PARENTS. Parents cannot love for their
children any more than they can eat or sleep, or breathe, or die and go to
heaven for them. They may give wholesome advice merely, but should leave
the entire decision to the unbiased judgment of the parties themselves, who
mainly are to experience the consequences of their choice. Besides, such is
human nature, that to oppose lovers, or to speak against the person
beloved, only increases their desire and determination to marry.

16. RUN-AWAY MATCHES.--Many a run-away match would never have taken place
but for opposition or interference. Parents are mostly to be blamed for
these elopements. Their children marry partly out of spite and to be
contrary. Their very natures tell them that this interference is unjust--as
it really is--and this excites combativeness, firmness, and self-esteem, in
combination with the social faculties, to powerful and even blind
resistance--which turmoil of the faculties hastens the match. Let the
affections of a daughter be once slightly enlisted in your favor, and then
let the "old folks" start an opposition, and you may feel sure of your
prize. If she did not love you before, she will now, that you are
persecuted. {185}

17. DISINHERITANCE.--Never disinherit, or threaten to disinherit, a child
for marrying against your will. If you wish a daughter not to marry a
certain man, oppose her, and she will be sure to marry him; so also in
reference to a son.

18. PROPER TRAINING.--The secret is, however, all in a nutshell. Let the
father properly train his daughter, and she will bring her first
love-letter to him, and give him an opportunity to cherish a suitable
affection, and to nip an improper one in the germ, before it has time to do
any harm.

19. THE FATAL MISTAKES OF PARENTS.--_There is, however, one way of
effectually preventing an improper match, and that is, not to allow your
children to associate with any whom you are unwilling they should marry.
How cruel as well as unjust, to allow a daughter to associate with a young
man till the affections of both are riveted, and then forbid her marrying
him. Forbid all association or consent cheerfully to the marriage._

20. AN INTEMPERATE LOVER.--Do not flatter yourselves, young women, that you
can wean even an occasional wine drinker from his cups by love and
persuasion. Ardent spirit at first, kindles up the fires of love into the
fierce flames at burning licentiousness, which burn out every element of
love and destroy every vestige of pure affection. It over-excites the
passions, and thereby finally destroys it,--producing at first, unbridled
libertinism, and then an utter barrenness of love; besides reversing the
other faculties of the drinker against his own consort, and those of the
wife against her drinking husband.

       *       *       *       *       *


FIRST LOVE, DESERTION AND DIVORCE.

1. FIRST LOVE.--This is the most important direction of all. The first love
experiences a tenderness, a purity and unreservedness, an exquisiteness, a
devotedness, and a poetry belonging to no subsequent attachment. "Love,
like life, has no second spring." Though a second attachment may be
accompanied by high moral feeling, and to a devotedness to the object
loved; yet, let love be checked or blighted in its first pure emotion, and
the beauty of its spring is irrecoverably withered and lost. This does not
mean the simple love of children in the first attachment they call love,
but rather the mature intelligent love of those of suitable age.

[Illustration: CONSIDERING THE QUESTION.]

{187}

2. FREE FROM TEMPTATIONS.--As long as his heart is bound up in its first
bundle of love and devotedness--as long as his affections remain
reciprocated and uninterrupted--so long temptations cannot take effect. His
heart is callous to the charms of others, and the very idea of bestowing
his affections upon another is abhorrent. Much more so is animal
indulgence, which is morally impossible.

3. SECOND LOVE NOT CONSTANT.--But let this first love be broken off, and
the flood-gates of passion are raised. Temptations now flow in upon him. He
casts a lustful eye upon every passing female, and indulges unchaste
imaginations and feelings. Although his conscientiousness or intellect may
prevent actual indulgence, yet temptations now take effect, and render him
liable to err; whereas before they had no power to awaken improper thoughts
or feelings. Thus many young men find their ruin.

4. LEGAL MARRIAGE.--What would any woman give for merely a nominal or legal
husband, just to live with and provide for her, but who entertained not one
spark of love for her, or whose affections were bestowed upon another? How
absurd, how preposterous the doctrine that the obligations of marriage
derive their sacredness from legal enactments and injunctions! How it
literally profanes this holy of holies, and drags down this heaven-born
institution from its original, divine elevation, to the level of a merely
human device. Who will dare to advocate the human institution of marriage
without the warm heart of a devoted and loving companion!

5. LEGISLATION.--But no human legislation can so guard this institution but
that it may be broken in spirit, though, perhaps, acceded to in form; for,
it is the heart which this institution requires. There must be true and
devoted affection, or marriage is a farce and a failure.

6. THE MARRIAGE CEREMONY AND THE LAW GOVERNING MARRIAGE are for the
protection of the individual, yet a man and woman may be married by law and
yet unmarried in spirit. The law may tie together, and no marriage be
consummated. Marriage therefore is Divine, and "whom God hath joined
together let no man put asunder." A right marriage means a right state of
the heart. A careful study of this work will be a great help to both the
unmarried and the married.

7. DESERTION AND DIVORCE.--For a young man to court a young woman, and
excite her love till her affections are riveted, and then (from sinister
motives, such as, to marry one richer, or more handsome), to leave her, and
try {188} elsewhere, is the very same crime as to divorce her from all that
she holds dear on earth--to root up and pull out her imbedded affections,
and to tear her from her rightful husband. First love is always constant.
The second love brings uncertainty--too often desertions before marriage
and divorces after marriage.

8. THE COQUET.--The young woman to play the coquet, and sport with the
sincere affections of an honest and devoted young man, is one of the
highest crimes that human nature can commit. Better murder him in body too,
as she does in soul and morals, and it is the result of previous
disappointment, never the outcome of a sincere first love.

9. ONE MARRIAGE. One evidence that second marriages are contrary to the
laws of our social nature, is the fact that almost all step-parents and
step-children disagree. Now, what law has been broken, to induce this
penalty? The law of marriage; and this is one of the ways in which the
breach punishes itself. It is much more in accordance with our natural
feelings, especially those of mothers, that children should be brought up
by their own parent.

10. SECOND MARRIAGE.--Another proof of this point is, that second marriage
is more a matter of business. "I'll give you a home, if you'll take care of
my children." "It's a bargain," is the way most second matches are made.
There is little of the poetry of first-love, and little of the coyness and
shrinking diffidence which characterize the first attachment. Still these
remarks apply almost equally to a second attachment, as to second marriage.

11. THE CONCLUSION OF THE WHOLE MATTER.--Let this portion be read and
pondered, and also the one entitled, "Marry your First Love if possible,"
which assigns the cause, and points out the only remedy, of licentiousness.
As long as the main cause of this vice exists, and is aggravated by
purse-proud, high-born, aristocratic parents and friends, and even by the
virtuous and religious, just so long, and exactly in the same ratio will
this blighting Sirocco blast the fairest flowers of female innocence and
lovliness, and blight our noblest specimens of manliness. No sin of our
land is greater.

[Illustration]

{189} [Illustration: CUPID'S CHARM.]

       *       *       *       *       *


{190}

Flirting and Its Dangers.

[Illustration: HOW MANY YOUNG GIRLS ARE RUINED.]

1. NO EXCUSE.--In this country there is no excuse for the young man who
seeks the society of the loose and the dissolute. There is at all times and
everywhere open to him a society of persons of the opposite sex of his own
age and of pure thoughts and lives, whose conversation will refine him and
drive from his bosom ignoble and impure thoughts.

2. THE DANGERS.--The young man who may take pleasure in the fact that he is
the hero of half a dozen or more {191} engagements and love episodes,
little realizes that such constant excitement often causes not only
dangerously frequent and long-continued nocturnal emissions, but most
painful affections of the testicles. Those who show too great familiarity
with the other sex, who entertain lascivious thoughts, continually exciting
the sexual desires, always suffer a weakening of power and sometimes the
actual diseases of degeneration, chronic inflammation of the gland,
spermatorrhoea, impotence, and the like.--Young man, beware; your
punishment for trifling with the affections of others may cost you a life
of affliction.

3. REMEDY.--Do not violate the social laws. Do not trifle with the
affections of your nature. Do not give others countless anguish, and also
do not run the chances of injuring yourself and others for life. The
society of refined and pure women is one of the strongest safeguards a
young man can have, and he who seeks it will not only find satisfaction,
but happiness. Simple friendship and kind affections for each other will
ennoble and benefit.

4. THE TIME FOR MARRIAGE.--When a young man's means permit him to marry, he
should then look intelligently for her with whom he expects to pass the
remainder of his life in perfect loyalty, and in sincerity and singleness
of heart. Seek her to whom he is ready to swear to be ever true.

5. BREACH OF CONFIDENCE.--Nothing is more certain, says Dr. Naphey, to
undermine domestic felicity, and sap the foundation of marital happiness,
than marital infidelity. The risks of disease which a married man runs in
impure intercourse are far more serious, because they not only involve
himself, but his wife and his children. He should know that there is
nothing which a woman will not forgive sooner than such a breach of
confidence. He is exposed to the plots and is pretty certain sooner or
later to fall into the snares of those atrocious parties who subsist on
blackmail. And should he escape these complications, he still must lose
self-respect, and carry about with him the burden of a guilty conscience
and a broken vow.

6. SOCIETY RULES AND CUSTOMS.--A young man can enjoy the society of ladies
without being a "flirt." He can escort ladies to parties, public places of
interest, social gatherings, etc., without showing special devotion to any
one special young lady. When he finds the choice of his heart, then he will
be justified to manifest it, and publicly proclaim it by paying her the
compliment, exclusive attention. To keep a lady's company six months is a
public announcement of an engagement.

       *       *       *       *       *


{192}

A Word to Maidens.

1. NO YOUNG LADY who is not willing to assume the responsibility of a true
wife, and be crowned with the sacred diadem of motherhood, should ever
think of getting married. We have too many young ladies to-day who despise
maternity, who openly vow that they will never be burdened with children,
and yet enter matrimony at the first opportunity. What is the result? Let
echo answer, What? Unless a young lady believes that motherhood is noble,
is honorable, is divine, and she is willing to carry out that sacred
function of her nature, she had a thousand times better refuse every
proposal, and enter some honorable occupation and wisely die an old maid by
choice.

2. ON THE OTHER HAND, YOUNG LADY, never enter into the physical relations
of marriage with a man until you have conversed with him freely and fully
on these relations. Learn distinctly his views and feelings and
expectations in regard to that purest and most ennobling of all the
functions of your nature, and the most sacred of all intimacies of conjugal
love. Your self-respect, your beauty, your glory, your heaven, as a wife,
will be more directly involved in his feelings and views and practices, in
regard to that relation, than in all other things. As you would not become
a weak, miserable, imbecile, unlovable and degraded wife and mother, in the
very prime of your life, come to a perfect understanding with your chosen
one, ere you commit your person to his keeping in the sacred intimacies of
home. Beware of that man who, under pretence of delicacy, modesty, and
propriety, shuns conversation with you on this relation, and on the
hallowed function of maternity.

3. TALK WITH YOUR INTENDED frankly and openly. Remember, concealment and
mystery in him, towards you, on all other subjects pertaining to conjugal
union might be overlooked, but if he conceals his views here, rest assured
it bodes no good to your purity and happiness as a wife and mother. You can
have no more certain assurance that you are to be victimized, your soul and
body offered up, _slain_, on the altar of his sensualism, than his
unwillingness to converse with you on subjects so vital to your happiness.
Unless he is willing to hold his manhood in abeyance to the calls of your
nature and to your conditions, and consecrate its passions and its powers
to the elevation and happiness of his wife and children, your maiden soul
had better return to God unadorned with the diadem of conjugal and maternal
love than that you should become the wife of such a man and the mother of
his children. {193}

[Illustration: ROMAN LOVE MAKING.]

       *       *       *       *       *


{194}

POPPING THE QUESTION.

[Illustration: Uniformed Men are always Popular with the Ladies.]

1. MAKING THE DECLARATION.--There are few emergencies in business and few
events in life that bring to man the trying ordeal of "proposing to a
lady." We should be glad to help the bashful lover in his hours of
perplexity, embarrassment and hesitation, but unfortunately we cannot pop
the question for him, nor give him a formula by which {195} he may do it.
Different circumstances and different surroundings compel every lover to be
original in his form or mode of proposing.

2. BASHFULNESS.--If a young man is very bashful, he should write his
sentiments in a clear, frank manner on a neat white sheet of note paper,
enclose it in a plain white envelope and find some way to convey it to the
lady's hand.

3. THE ANSWER.--If the beloved one's heart is touched, and she is in
sympathy with the lover, the answer should be frankly and unequivocally
given. If the negative answer is necessary, it should be done in the
kindest and most sympathetic language, yet definite, positive and to the
point, and the gentleman should at once withdraw his suit and continue
friendly but not familiar.

4. SAYING "NO" FOR "YES."--If girls are foolish enough to say "No" when
they mean "Yes," they must suffer the consequences which often follow. A
man of intelligence and self-respect will not ask a lady twice. It is
begging for recognition and lowers his dignity, should he do so. A lady is
supposed to know her heart sufficiently to consider the question to her
satisfaction before giving an answer.

5. CONFUSION OF WORDS AND MISUNDERSTANDING.--Sometimes a man's happiness,
has depended on his manner of popping the question. Many a time the girl
has said "No" because the question was so worded that the affirmative did
not come from the mouth naturally; and two lives that gravitated toward
each other with all their inward force have been thrown suddenly apart,
because the electric keys were not carefully touched.

6. SCRIPTURAL DECLARATION.--The church is not the proper place to conduct a
courtship, yet the following is suggestive and ingenious.

A young gentleman, familiar with the Scriptures, happening to sit in a pew
adjoining a young lady for whom he conceived a violent attachment, made his
proposal in this way: He politely handed his neighbor a Bible open, with a
pin stuck in the following text: Second Epistle of John, verse 5:

"And I beseech thee, lady, not as though I wrote a new commandment unto
thee, but that we had from the beginning, that we love one another."

[Illustration: SEALING THE ENGAGEMENT.

From the Most Celebrated Painting in the German Department at the World's
Fair.]

She returned it, pointing to the second chapter of Ruth, verse 10: "Then
she fell on her face, and bowed herself to the ground, and said unto him.
Why have I found grace in {197} thine eyes that thou shouldest take
knowledge of me, seeing I am a stranger?"

He returned the book, pointing to the 13th verse of the Third Epistle of
John: "Having many things to write unto you, I would not write to you with
paper and ink, but trust to come unto you and speak face to face, that your
joy may be full."

From the above interview a marriage took place the ensuing month in the
same church.

7. HOW JENNY WAS WON.

  On a sunny Summer morning,
  Early as the dew was dry,
  Up the hill I went a berrying;
  Need I tell you--tell you why?

  Farmer Davis had a daughter,
  And it happened that I knew,
  On each sunny morning, Jenny
  Up the hill went berrying too.

  Lonely work is picking berries,
  So I joined her on the hill:
 "Jenny, dear," said I, "your basket's
  Quite too large for one to fill."

  So we stayed--we two--to fill it,
  Jenny talking--I was still.--
  Leading where the hill was steepest,
  Picking berries up the hill.

 "This is up-hill work," said Jenny;
 "So is life," said I; "shall we
  Climb it each alone, or, Jenny,
  Will you come and climb with me?"

  Redder than the blushing berries
  Jenny's cheek a moment grew,
  While without delay she answered,
 "I will come and climb with you."

{198}

8. A ROMANTIC WAY FOR PROPOSING.--In Peru they have a romantic way of
popping the question. The suitor appears on the appointed evening, with a
gaily dressed troubadour, under the balcony of his beloved. The singer
steps before her flower-bedecked window, and sings her beauties in the name
of her lover. He compares her size to that of a pear-tree, her lips to two
blushing rose-buds, and her womanly form to that of a dove. With assumed
harshness the lady asks her lover: "Who are you, and what do you want?" He
answers with ardent confidence: "Thy love I do adore, The stars live in the
harmony of love, and why should not we, too, love each other?" Then the
proud beauty gives herself away: she takes her flower-wreath from her hair
and throws it down to her lover, promising to be his forever.

[Illustration: A PERUVIAN BEAUTY.]

       *       *       *       *       *


{199}

The Wedding.

[Illustration: THE BRIDE.]

1. THE PROPER TIME.--Much has been printed in various volumes regarding the
time of the year, the influence of the seasons, etc., as determining the
proper time to set for the wedding day. Circumstances must govern these
things. To be sure, it is best to avoid extremes of heat and cold. Very hot
weather is debilitating, and below zero is uncomfortable.

2. THE LADY SHOULD SELECT THE DAY.--There is one element in the time that
is of great importance, physically, especially to the lady. It is the day
of the month, and it is hoped that every lady who contemplates marriage is
informed upon the great facts of ovulation. By reading page {200} 245 she
will understand that it is to her advantage to select a wedding day about
fifteen or eighteen days after the close of menstruation in the month
chosen, since it is not best that the first child should be conceived
during the excitement or irritation of first attempts at congress; besides
modest brides naturally do not wish to become large with child before the
season of congratulation and visiting on their return from the "wedding
tour" is over.

Again, it is asserted by many of the best writers on this subject, that the
mental condition of either parent at the time of intercourse will be
stamped upon the embryo; hence it is not only best, but wise, that the
first-born should not be conceived until several months after marriage,
when the husband and wife have nicely settled in their new home, and become
calm in their experience of each other's society.

3. THE "BRIDAL TOUR" is considered by many newly-married couples as a
necessary introduction to a life of connubial joy. There is, in our
opinion, nothing in the custom to recommend it. After the excitement and
overwork before and accompanying a wedding, the period immediately
following should be one of _rest_.

Again, the money expended on the ceremony and a tour of the principal
cities, etc., might, in most cases, be applied to a multitude of after-life
comforts of far more lasting value and importance. To be sure, it is not
pleasant for the bride, should she remain at home, to pass through the
ordeal of criticism and vulgar comments of acquaintances and friends, and
hence, to escape this, the young couple feel like getting away for a time.
Undoubtedly the best plan for the great majority, after this most eventful
ceremony, is to enter their future home at once, and there to remain in
comparative privacy until the novelty of the situation is worn off.

4. IF THE CONVENTIONAL TOUR is taken, the husband should remember that his
bride cannot stand the same amount of tramping around and sight-seeing that
he can. The female organs of generation are so easily affected by excessive
exercise of the limbs which support them, that at this critical period it
would be a foolish and costly experience to drag a lady hurriedly around
the country on an extensive and protracted round of sight-seeing or
visiting. Unless good common-sense is displayed in the manner of spending
the "honey-moon," it will prove very untrue to its name. In many cases it
lays the foundation for the wife's first and life-long "backache."

       *       *       *       *       *


{201}

Advice to Newly Married Couples.

[Illustration: THE HONEY-MOON.]

1. "BE YE FRUITFUL AND MULTIPLY" is a Bible commandment which the children
of men habitually obey. However they may disagree on other subjects, all
are in accord on this; the barbarous, the civilized, the high, the low, the
fierce, the gentle--all unite in the desire which finds its accomplishment
in the reproduction of their kind. Who {202} shall quarrel with the
Divinely implanted instinct, or declare it to be vulgar or unmentionable?
It is during the period of the honeymoon that the intensity of this desire,
coupled with the greatest curiosity, is at its height, and the unbridled
license often given the passions at this time is attended with the most
dangerous consequences.

2. CONSUMMATION OF MARRIAGE.--The first time that the husband and wife
cohabit together after the ceremony has been performed is called the
consummation of marriage. Many grave errors have been committed by people
in this, when one or both of the contracting parties were not physically or
sexually in a condition to carry out the marriage relation. A marriage,
however, is complete without this in the eyes of the law, as it is a maxim
taken from the Roman civil statutes that consent, not cohabitation, is the
binding element in the ceremony. Yet, in most States of the U.S., and in
some other countries; marriage is legally declared void and of no effect
where it is not possible to consummate the marriage relation. A divorce may
be obtained provided the injured party begins the suit.

3. TEST OF VIRGINITY.--The consummation of marriage with a virgin is not
necessarily attended with a flow of blood, and the absence of this sign is
not the slightest presumption against her former chastity. The true test of
virginity is modesty void of any disagreeable familiarity. A sincere
Christian faith is one of the best recommendations.

4. LET EVERY MAN REMEMBER that the legal right of marriage does not carry
with it the moral right to injure for life the loving companion he has
chosen. Ignorance may be the cause, but every man before he marries should
know something of the physiology and the laws of health, and we here give
some information which is of very great importance to every newly-married
man.

5. SENSUALITY.--Lust crucifies love. The young sensual husband is generally
at fault. Passion sways and the duty to bride and wife is nor thought of,
and so a modest young wife is often actually forced and assaulted by the
unsympathetic haste of her husband. An amorous man in that way soon
destroys his own love, and thus is laid the foundation for many
difficulties that soon develop trouble and disturb the happiness of both.

6. ABUSE AFTER MARRIAGE.--Usually marriage is consummated within a day or
two after the ceremony, but this is {203} gross injustice to the bride. In
most cases she is nervous, timid, and exhausted by the duties of
preparation for the wedding, and in no way in a condition, either in body
or mind, for the vital change which the married relation bring upon her.
Many a young husband often lays the foundation of many diseases of the womb
and of the nervous system in gratifying his unchecked passions without a
proper regard for his wife's exhausted condition.

7. THE FIRST CONJUGAL APPROACHES are usually painful to the new wife, and
no enjoyment to her follows. Great caution and kindness should be
exercised. A young couple rushing together in their animal passion soon
produce a nervous and irritating condition which ere long brings apathy,
indifference, if not dislike. True love and a high regard for each other
will temper passion into moderation.

8. WERE THE ABOVE INJUNCTIONS HEEDED fully and literally it would be folly
to say more, but this would be omitting all account of the bridegroom's new
position, the power of his passion, and the timidity of the fair creature
who is wondering what fate has in store for her trembling modesty. To be
sure, there are some women who are possessed of more forward natures and
stronger desires than others. In such cases there may be less trouble.

9. A COMMON ERROR.--The young husband may have read in some treatise on
physiology that the hymen in a virgin is the great obstacle to be overcome.
He is apt to conclude that this is all, that some force will be needed to
break it down, and that therefore an amount of urgency even to the degree
of inflicting considerable pain is justifiable. This is usually wrong. It
rarely constitutes any obstruction, and, even when its rupturing may be
necessary, it alone seldom causes suffering.

There are sometimes certain deformities of the vagina, but no woman should
knowingly seek matrimonial relations when thus afflicted.

We quote from Dr. C. A. Huff the following:

10. "WHAT IS IT, THEN, THAT USUALLY CAUSES distress to many women, whether
a bride or a long-time wife?" The answer is, Simply those conditions of the
organs in which they are not properly prepared, by anticipation and desire,
to receive a foreign body. The modest one craves only refined and platonic
love at first, and if husbands, new and old, would only realize this plain
truth, wife-torturing would cease and the happiness of each one of all
human pairs vastly increase. {204}

11. THE CONDITIONS OF THE FEMALE organs depend upon the state of the mind
just as much as in the case of the husband. The male, however, being more
sensual, is more quickly roused. She is far less often or early ready. In
its unexcited state the vagina is lax, its walls are closed together, and
their surfaces covered by but little lubricating secretion. The chaster one
of the pair has no desire that this sacred vestibule to the great arcana of
procreation shall be immediately and roughly invaded. This, then, is the
time for all approaches by the husband to be of the most delicate,
considerate, and refined description possible. The quietest and softest
demeanor, with gentle and re-assuring words, are all that should be
attempted at first. The wedding day has probably been one of fatigue, and
it is foolish to go farther.

12. FOR MORE THAN ONE NIGHT it will be wise, indeed, if the wife's
confidence shall be as much wooed and won by patient, delicate, and
prolonged courting, as before the marriage engagement. How long should this
period of waiting be can only be decided by the circumstances of any case.
The bride will ultimately deny no favor which is sought with full deference
to her modesty, and in connection with which bestiality is not exhibited.
Her nature is that of delicacy; her affection is of a refined character; if
the love and conduct offered to her are a careful effort to adapt roughness
and strength to her refinement and weakness, her admiration and responsive
love will be excited to the utmost.

13. WHEN THAT MOMENT ARRIVES when the bride finds she can repose perfect
confidence in the kindness of her husband, that his love is not purely
animal, and that no violence will be attempted, the power of her affection
for him will surely assert itself; the mind will act on those organs which
nature has endowed to fulfil the law of her being, the walls of the vagina
will expand, and the glands at the entrance will be fully lubricated by a
secretion of mucous which renders congress a matter of comparative ease.

14. WHEN THIS RESPONSIVE ENLARGEMENT and lubrication are fully realized, it
is made plain why the haste and force so common to first and subsequent
coition is, as it has been justly called, nothing but "legalized rape."
Young husband! Prove your manhood, not by yielding to unbridled lust and
cruelty, but by the exhibition of true power in _self-control_ and patience
with the helpless being confided to your care! Prolong the delightful
season of courting into and _through_ wedded life, and rich shall be your
reward. {205}

15. A WANT OF DESIRE may often prevail, and may be caused by loss of sleep,
study, constant thought, mental disturbance, anxiety, self-abuse, excessive
use of tobacco or alcoholic drink, etc. Overwork may cause debility; a man
may not have an erection for months, yet it may not be a sign of debility,
sexual lethargy or impotence. Get the mind and the physical constitution in
proper condition, and most all these difficulties will disappear. Good
athletic exercise by walking, riding, or playing croquet, or any other
amusement, will greatly improve the condition. A good rest, however, will
be necessary to fully restore the mind and the body, then the natural
condition of the sexual organs will be resumed.

16. HAVING TWINS.--Having twins is undoubtedly hereditary and descends from
generation to generation, and persons who have twins are generally those
who have great sexual vigor. It is generally the result of a second
cohabitation immediately following the first, but some parents have twins
who cohabit but once during several days.

17. PROPER INTERCOURSE.--The right relation of a newly-married couple will
rather increase than diminish love. To thus offer up the maiden on the
altar of love and affection only swells her flood of joy and bliss;
whereas, on the other hand, sensuality humbles, debases, pollutes, and
never elevates. Young husbands should wait for an _invitation to the
banquet_, and they will be amply paid by the very pleasure sought.
Invitation or permission delights, and possession by force degrades. The
right-minded bridegroom will postpone the exercise of his nuptial rights
for a few days, and allow his young wife to become rested from the
preparation and fatigue of the wedding, and become accustomed to the
changes in her new relations of life.

18. RIGHTLY BEGINNING SEXUAL LIFE.--Intercourse promotes all the functions
of the body and mind, but rampant lust and sexual abuses soon destroy the
natural pleasures of intercourse, and unhappiness will be the result.
Remember that _intercourse_ should not become the polluted purpose of
marriage. To be sure, rational enjoyment benefits and stimulates love, but
the pleasure of each other's society, standing together on all questions of
mutual benefit, working hand in hand and shoulder to shoulder in the battle
of life, raising a family of beautiful children, sharing each other's joys
and sorrows, are the things that bring to every couple the best, purest,
and noblest enjoyment that God has bestowed upon man. {206}

[Illustration: A TURKISH HAREM.]

Sexual Proprieties and Improprieties.

1. To have offspring is not to be regarded as a luxury, but as a great
primary necessity of health and happiness, of which every fully-developed
man and woman should have a fair share, while it cannot be denied that the
ignorance of the necessity of sexual intercourse to the health and virtue
of both man and woman is the most fundamental error in medical and moral
philosophy.

2. In a state of pure nature, where man would have his sexual instincts
under full and natural restraint, there would be little, if any,
licentiousness, and children would be the result of natural desire, and not
the accidents of lust.

3. This is an age of sensuality; unnatural passions are cultivated and
indulged. Young people in the course of their engagement often sow the seed
of serious excesses. This habit of embracing, sitting on the lover's lap,
leaning on his breast, long and uninterrupted periods of secluded
companionship, have become so common that it is amazing how a young lady
can safely arrive at the wedding day. While this conduct may safely
terminate with the wedding day, yet it cultivates the tendency which often
results in excessive indulgencies after the honey-moon is over.

4. SEPARATE BEDS.--Many writers have vigorously championed as a reform the
practice of separate beds for husband and wife. While we would not
recommend such separation, it is no doubt very much better for both husband
and wife, in case the wife is pregnant. Where people are reasonably
temperate, no such ordinary precautions as {207} separate sleeping places
may be necessary. But in case of pregnancy it will add rest to the mother
and add vigor to the unborn child. Sleeping together, however, is natural
and cultivates true affection, and it is physiologically true that in very
cold weather life is prolonged by husband and wife sleeping together.

5. THE AUTHORITY OF THE WIFE.--Let the wife judge whether she desires a
separate couch or not. She has the superior right to control her own
person. In such diseases as consumption, or other severe or lingering
diseases, separate beds should always be insisted upon.

6. THE TIME FOR INDULGENCE.--The health of the generative functions depends
upon exercise, just the same as any other vital organ. Intercourse should
be absolutely avoided just before or after meals, or just after mental
excitement or physical exercise. No wife should indulge her husband when he
is under the influence of alcoholic stimulants, for idiocy and other
serious maladies are liable to be visited upon the offspring.

7. RESTRAINT DURING PREGNANCY.--There is no question but what moderate
indulgence during the first few months of pregnancy does not result in
serious harm; but people who excessively satisfy their ill-governed
passions are liable to pay a serious penalty.

8. MISCARRIAGE.--If a woman is liable to abortion or miscarriage, absolute
abstinence is the only remedy. No sexual indulgence during pregnancy can be
safely tolerated.

9. It is better for people not to marry until they are of proper age. It is
a physiological fact that men seldom reach the full maturity of their
virile power before the age of twenty-five, and the female rarely attains
the full vigor of her sexual powers before the age of twenty.

10. ILLICIT PLEASURES.--The indulgence of illicit pleasures, says Dr. S.
Pancoast, sooner or later is sure to entail the most loathsome diseases on
their votaries. Among these diseases are Gonorrhoea, Syphilis,
Spermatorrhoea (waste of semen by daily and nightly involuntary emissions),
Satyriasis (a species of sexual madness, or a sexual diabolism, causing men
to commit rape and other beastly acts and outrages, not only on women and
children, but men and animals, as sodomy, pederasty, etc.), Nymphomania
(causing women to assail every man they meet, and supplicate and excite him
to gratify their lustful passions, or who resort to means of sexual
pollutions, which is impossible to describe without shuddering), together
with spinal diseases and many disorders of the most distressing and
disgusting character, {208} filling the bones with rottenness, and eating
away the flesh by gangrenous ulcers, until the patient dies, a horrible
mass of putridity and corruption.

11. SENSUALITY.--Sensuality is not love, but an unbridled desire which
kills the soul. Sensuality will drive away the roses in the cheeks of
womanhood, undermine health and produce a brazen countenance that can be
read by all men. The harlot may commit her sins in the dark, but her
countenance reveals her character and her immorality is an open secret.

12. SEXUAL TEMPERANCE.--All excesses and absurdities of every kind should
be carefully avoided. Many of the female disorders which often revenge
themselves in the cessation of all sexual pleasure are largely due to the
excessive practice of sexual indulgence.

13. FREQUENCY.--Some writers claim that intercourse should never occur
except for the purpose of childbearing; but such restraint is not natural
and consequently not conducive to health. There are many conditions in
which the health of the mother and offspring must be respected. It is now
held that it is nearer a crime than a virtue to prostitute woman to the
degradation of breeding animals by compelling her to bring into life more
offspring than can be born healthy, or be properly cared for and educated.

14. In this work we shall attempt to specify no rule, but simply give
advice as to the health and happiness of both man and wife. A man should
not gratify his own desires at the expense of his wife's health, comfort or
inclination. Many men no doubt harass their wives and force many burdens
upon their slender constitutions. But it is a great sin and no true husband
will demand unreasonable recognition. The wife when physically able,
however, should bear with her husband. Man is naturally sensitive on this
subject, and it takes but little to alienate his affections and bring
discord into the family.

15. The best writers lay down the rule for the government of the
marriage-bed, that sexual indulgence should only occur about once in a week
or ten days, and this of course applies only to those who enjoy a fair
degree of health. But it is a hygienic and physiological fact that those
who indulge only once a month receive a far greater degree of the intensity
of enjoyment than those who indulge their passions more frequently. Much
pleasure is lost by excesses where much might be gained by temperance,
giving rest to the organs for the accumulation of nervous force. {209}

[Illustration]

How to Perpetuate the Honey-Moon.

1. CONTINUE YOUR COURTSHIP.--Like causes produce like effects.

2. NEGLECT OF YOUR COMPANION.--Do not assume a right to neglect your
companion more after marriage than you did before.

3. SECRETS.--Have no secrets that you keep from your companion. A third
party is always disturbing.

4. AVOID THE APPEARANCE OF EVIL.--In matrimonial matters it is often that
the mere appearance contains all the evil. Love, as soon as it rises above
calculation and becomes love, is exacting. It gives all, and demands all.

5. ONCE MARRIED, NEVER OPEN YOUR MIND TO ANY CHANGE.--If you keep the door
of your purpose closed, evil or even desirable changes cannot make headway
without help.

6. KEEP STEP IN MENTAL DEVELOPMENT.--A tree that grows for forty years may
take all the sunlight from a tree that stops growing at twenty.

7. KEEP A LIVELY INTEREST IN THE BUSINESS OF THE HOME.--Two that do not
pull together are weaker than either alone.

8. GAUGE YOUR EXPENSES BY YOUR REVENUES.--Love must eat. The sheriff often
levies on Cupid long before he takes away the old furniture.

9. START FROM WHERE YOUR PARENTS STARTED RATHER THAN FROM WHERE THEY NOW
ARE.--Hollow and showy boarding often furnishes the too strong temptation,
while the quietness of a humble home would cement the hearts beyond risk.
{210}

10. AVOID DEBT.--Spend your own money, but earn it first, then it will not
be necessary to blame any one for spending other people's.

11. DO NOT BOTH GET ANGRY AT THE SAME TIME.--Remember, it takes two to
quarrel.

12. DO NOT ALLOW YOURSELF EVER TO COME TO AN OPEN RUPTURE.--Things unsaid
need less repentance.

13. STUDY TO CONFORM YOUR TASTES AND HABITS TO THE TASTES AND HABITS OF
YOUR COMPANION.--If two walk together, they must agree.

       *       *       *       *       *


How to Be a Good Wife.

1. REVERENCE YOUR HUSBAND.--He sustains by God's order a position of
dignity as head of a family, head of the woman. Any breaking down of this
order indicates a mistake in the union, or a digression from duty.

2. LOVE HIM.--A wife loves as naturally as the sun shines. Love is your
best weapon. You conquered him with that in the first place. You can
reconquer by the same means.

3. DO NOT CONCEAL YOUR LOVE FROM HIM.--If he is crowded with care, and too
busy to seem to heed your love, you need to give all the greater attention
to securing his knowledge of your love. If you intermit he will settle down
into a hard, cold life with increased rapidity. Your example will keep the
light on his conviction. The more he neglects the fire on the hearth, the
more carefully must you feed and guard it. It must not be allowed to go
out. Once out you must sit ever in darkness and in the cold.

4. CULTIVATE THE MODESTY AND DELICACY OF YOUR YOUTH.--The relations and
familiarity of wedded life may seem to tone down the sensitive and retiring
instincts of girlhood, but nothing can compensate for the loss of these.
However, much men may admire the public performance of gifted women, they
do not desire that boldness and dash in a wife. The holy blush of a
maiden's modesty is more powerful in hallowing and governing a home than
the heaviest armament that ever a warrior bore.

5. CULTIVATE PERSONAL ATTRACTIVENESS.--This means the storing of your mind
with a knowledge of passing events, and with a good idea of the world's
general advance. If you read nothing, and make no effort to make yourself
attractive, you will soon sink down into a dull hack of stupidity. If {211}
your husband never hears from you any words of wisdom, or of common
information, he will soon hear nothing from you. Dress and gossips soon
wear out. If your memory is weak, so that it hardly seems worth while to
read, that is additional reason for reading.

[Illustration: TALKING BEFORE MARRIAGE.]

6. CULTIVATE PHYSICAL ATTRACTIVENESS.--When you were encouraging the
attentions of him whom you now call husband, you did not neglect any item
of dress or appearance {212} that could help you. Your hair was always in
perfect training. You never greeted him with a ragged or untidy dress or
soiled hands. It is true that your "market is made," but you cannot afford
to have it "broken." Cleanliness and good taste will attract now as they
did formerly. Keep yourself at your best. Make the most of physical
endowments. Neatness and order break the power of poverty.

7. STUDY YOUR HUSBAND'S CHARACTER.--He has his peculiarities. He has no
right to many of them, and you need to know them; thus you can avoid many
hours of friction. The good pilot steers around the sunken rocks that lie
in the channel. The engineer may remove them, not the pilot. You are more
pilot than engineer. Consult his tastes. It is more important to your home,
that you should please him than anybody else.

8. PRACTICE ECONOMY.--Many families are cast out of peace into grumbling
and discord by being compelled to fight against poverty. When there are no
great distresses to be endured or accounted for, complaint and
fault-finding are not so often evoked. Keep your husband free from the
annoyance of disappointed creditors, and he will be more apt to keep free
from annoying you. To toil hard for bread, to fight the wolf from the door,
to resist impatient creditors, to struggle against complaining pride at
home, is too much to ask of one man. A crust that is your own is a feast,
while a feast that is purloined from unwilling creditors is a famine.

       *       *       *       *       *


How to Be a Good Husband.

1. SHOW YOUR LOVE.--All life manifests itself. As certainly as a live tree
will put forth leaves in the spring, so certainly will a living love show
itself. Many a noble man toils early and late to earn bread and position
for his wife. He hesitates at no weariness for her sake. He justly thinks
that such industry and providence give a better expression of his love than
he could by caressing her and letting the grocery bills go unpaid. He fills
the cellar and pantry. He drives and pushes his business. He never dreams
that he is actually starving his wife to death. He may soon have a woman
left to superintend his home, but his wife is dying. She must be kept alive
by the same process that called her into being. Recall and repeat the
little attentions and delicate compliments that once made you so agreeable,
and that fanned her love into a consuming flame. It is not beneath the
dignity of the skillful physician to study all the {214} little symptoms,
and order all the little round of attentions that check the waste of
strength and brace the staggering constitution. It is good work for a
husband to cherish his wife.

[Illustration: TALKING AFTER MARRIAGE.]

2. CONSULT WITH YOUR WIFE.--She is apt to be as right as you are, and
frequently able to add much to your stock of wisdom. In any event she
appreciates your attentions.

3. STUDY TO KEEP HER YOUNG.--It can be done. It is not work, but worry,
that wears. Keep a brave, true heart between her and all harm.

4. HELP TO BEAR HER BURDENS.--Bear one another's burdens, and so fulfill
the law of love. Love seeks opportunities to do for the loved object. She
has the constant care of your children. She is ordained by the Lord to
stand guard over them. Not a disease can appear in the community without
her taking the alarm. Not a disease can come over the threshold without her
instantly springing into the mortal combat. If there is a deficiency
anywhere, it comes out of her pleasure. Her burdens are everywhere. Look
for them, that you may lighten them.

5. MAKE YOURSELF HELPFUL BY THOUGHTFULNESS.--Remember to bring into the
house your best smile and sunshine. It is good for you, and it cheers up
the home. There is hardly a nook in the house that has not been carefully
hunted through to drive out everything that might annoy you. The dinner
which suits, or ought to suit you, has not come on the table of itself. It
represents much thoughtfulness and work. You can do no more manly thing
than find some way of expressing, in word or look, your appreciation of it.

6. EXPRESS YOUR WILL, NOT BY COMMANDS, BUT BY SUGGESTIONS.--It is God's
order that you should be the head of the family. You are clothed with
authority. But this does not authorize you to be stern and harsh, as an
officer in the army. Your authority is the dignity of love. When it is not
clothed in love it ceases to have the substance of authority. A simple
suggestion that may embody a wish, an opinion or an argument, becomes one
who reigns over such a kingdom as yours.

7. SEEK TO REFINE YOUR NATURE.--It is no slander to say that many men have
wives much more refined than themselves. This is natural in the
inequalities of life. Other qualities may compensate for any defect here.
But you need have no defect in refinement. Preserve the gentleness and
refinement of your wife as a rich legacy for your children, and in so doing
you will lift yourself to higher levels. {215}

8. BE A GENTLEMAN AS WELL AS A HUSBAND.--The signs and bronze and callouses
of toil are no indications that you are not a gentleman. The soul of
gentlemanliness is a kindly feeling toward others, that prompts one to
secure their comfort. That is why the thoughtful peasant lover is always so
gentlemanly, and in his love much above himself.

9. STAY AT HOME.--Habitual absence during the evenings is sure to bring
sorrow. If your duty or business calls you, you have the promise that you
will be kept in all your ways. But if you go out to mingle with other
society, and leave your wife at home alone, or with the children and
servants, know that there is no good in store for you. She has claims upon
you that you can not afford to allow to go to protest. Reverse the case.
You sit down alone after having waited all day for your wife's return, and
think of her as reveling in gay society, and see if you can keep out all
the doubts as to what takes her away. If your home is not as attractive as
you want it, you are a principal partner. Set yourself about the work of
making it attractive.

10. TAKE YOUR WIFE WITH YOU INTO SOCIETY.--Seclusion begets morbidness. She
needs some of the life that comes from contact with society. She must see
how other people appear and act. It often requires an exertion for her to
go out of her home, but it is good for her and for you. She will bring back
more sunshine. It is wise to rest sometimes. When the Arab stops for his
dinner he unpacks his camel. Treat your wife with as much consideration.

[Illustration]

{217}

Cause of Family Troubles.

[Illustration: TIRED OF LIFE.]

1. MUCH BETTER TO BE ALONE.--He who made man said it is not good for him to
be alone; but it is much better to be alone, than it is to be in some kinds
of company. Many couples who felt unhappy when they were apart, have been
utterly miserable when together; and scores who have been ready to go
through fire and water to get married, have been willing to run the risk of
fire and brimstone to get divorced. It is by no means certain that because
persons are wretched before marriage they will be happy after it. The
wretchedness of many homes, and the prevalence of immorality and divorce is
a sad commentary on the evils which result from unwise marriages.

2. UNAVOIDABLE EVILS.--There are plenty of unavoidable evils in this world,
and it is mournful to think of the multitudes who are preparing themselves
for needless disappointments, and who yet have no fear, and are unwilling
to be instructed, cautioned or warned. To them the experience of mature
life is of little account compared with the wisdom of ardent and
enthusiastic youth.

3. MATRIMONIAL INFELICITY.--One great cause of matrimonial infelicity is
the hasty marriages of persons who have no adequate knowledge of each
other's characters. Two strangers become acquainted, and are attracted to
each other, and without taking half the trouble to investigate or inquire
that a prudent man would take before buying a saddle horse, they are
married. In a few weeks or months it is perhaps found that one of the
parties was married already, or possibly that the man is drunken or
vicious, or the woman anything but what she should be. Then begins the
bitter part of the experience: shame, disgrace, scandal, separation, sin
and divorce, all come as the natural results of a rash and foolish
marriage. A little time spent in honest, candid, and careful preliminary
inquiry and investigation, would have saved the trouble.

4. THE CLIMAX.--It has been said that a man is never utterly ruined until
he has married a bad woman. So the climax of woman's miseries and sorrows
may be said to come only when she is bound with that bond which should be
her chiefest blessing and her highest joy, but which may prove her deepest
sorrow and her bitterest curse.

5. THE FOLLY OF FOLLIES.--There are some lessons which people are very slow
to learn, and yet which are based upon {218} the simple principles of
common-sense. A young lady casts her eye upon a young man. She says, "I
mean to have that man." She plies her arts, engages his affections, marries
him, and secures for herself a life of sorrow and disappointment, ending
perhaps in a broken up home or an early grave. Any prudent, intelligent
person of mature age, might have warned or cautioned her; but she sought no
advice, and accepted no admonition. A young man may pursue a similar course
with equally disastrous results.

6. HAP-HAZARD.--Many marriages are undoubtedly arranged by what may be
termed the accident of locality. Persons live near each other, become
acquainted, and engage themselves to those whom they never would have
selected as their companions in life if they had wider opportunities of
acquaintance. Within the borders of their limited circle they make a
selection which may be wise or may be unwise. They have no means of
judging, they allow no one else to judge for them. The results are
sometimes happy and sometimes unhappy in the extreme. It is well to act
cautiously in doing what can be done but once. It is not a pleasant
experience for a person to find out a mistake when it is too late to
rectify it.

7. WE ALL CHANGE.--When two persons of opposite sex are often thrown
together they are very naturally attracted to each other, and are liable to
imbibe the opinion that they are better fitted for life-long companionship
than any other two persons in the world. This may be the case, or it may
not be. There are a thousand chances against such a conclusion to one in
favor of it. But even if at the present moment these two persons were
fitted to be associated, no one can tell whether the case will be the same
five or ten years hence. Men change; women change; they are not the same
they were ten years ago; they are not the same they will be ten years
hence.

8. THE SAFE RULE.--Do not be in a hurry; take your time, and consider well
before you allow your devotion to rule you. Study first your character,
then study the character of her whom you desire to marry. Love works
mysteriously, and if it will bear careful and cool investigation, it will
no doubt thrive under adversity. When people marry they unite their
destinies for the better or the worse. Marriage is a contract for life and
will never bear a hasty conclusion. _Never be in a hurry!_

       *       *       *       *       *


{219}

Jealousy--Its Cause and Cure.

       *       *       *       *       *

          Trifles, light as air
  Are to the jealous confirmations strong,
  As proofs of holy writ.--SHAKESPEARE.

          Nor Jealousy
  Was understood, the injur'd lover's hell.--MILTON.

          O, beware, my lord, of jealousy;
  It is the green-eyed monster which doth mock
  The meat it feeds on.--SHAKESPEARE.

       *       *       *       *       *

1. DEFINITION.--Jealousy is an accidental passion, for which the faculty
indeed is unborn. In its nobler form and in its nobler motives it arises
from love, and in its lower form it arises from the deepest and darkest Pit
of Satan.

2. HOW DEVELOPED.--Jealousy arises either from weakness, which from a sense
of its own want of lovable qualities is not convinced of being sure of its
cause, or from distrust, which thinks the beloved person capable of
infidelity. Sometimes all these motives may act together.

3. NOBLEST JEALOUSY.--The noblest jealousy, if the term noble is
appropriate, is a sort of ambition or pride of the loving person who feels
it is an insult that another one should assume it as possible to supplant
his love, or it is the highest degree of devotion which sees a declaration
of its object in the foreign invasion, as it were, of his own altar.
Jealousy is always a sign that a little more wisdom might adorn the
individual without harm.

4. THE LOWEST JEALOUSY.--The lowest species of jealousy is a sort of
avarice of envy which, without being capable of love, at least wishes to
possess the object of its jealousy alone by the one party assuming a sort
of property right over the other. This jealousy, which might be called the
Satanic, is generally to be found with old withered "husbands," whom the
devil has prompted to marry young women and who forthwith dream night and
day of cuck-old's horns. These Argus-eyed keepers are no longer capable of
any feeling that could be called love, they are rather as a rule heartless
house-tyrants, and are in constant dread that some one may admire or
appreciate his unfortunate slave.

5. WANT OF LOVE.--The general conclusion will be that jealousy is more the
result of wrong conditions which cause uncongenial unions, and which
through moral corruption, artificially create distrust, than a necessary
accompaniment of love.

[Illustration: SEEKING THE LIFE OF A RIVAL.]

{221}

6. RESULT OF POOR OPINION.--Jealousy is a passion with which those are most
afflicted who are the least worthy of love. An innocent maiden who enters
marriage will not dream of getting jealous; but all her innocence cannot
secure her against the jealousy of her husband if he has been a libertine.
Those are wont to be the most jealous who have the consciousness that they
themselves are most deserving of jealousy. Most men in consequence of their
present education and corruption have so poor an opinion not only of the
male, but even of the female sex, that they believe every woman at every
moment capable of what they themselves have looked for among all and have
found among the most unfortunate, the prostitutes. No libertine can believe
in the purity of woman; it is contrary to nature. A libertine therefore
cannot believe in the loyalty of a faithful wife.

7. WHEN JUSTIFIABLE.--There may be occasions where jealousy is justifiable.
If a woman's confidence has been shaken in her husband, or a husband's
confidence has been shaken in his wife by certain signs or conduct, which
have no other meaning but that of infidelity, then there is just cause for
jealousy. There must, however, be certain proof as evidence of the wife's
or husband's immoral conduct. Imaginations or any foolish absurdities
should have no consideration whatever, and let everyone have confidence
until his or her faith has been shaken by the revelation of absolute facts.

8. CAUTION AND ADVICE.--No couple should allow their associations to
develop into an engagement and marriage if either one has any inclination
to jealousy. It shows invariably a want of sufficient confidence, and that
want of confidence, instead of being diminished after marriage, is liable
to increase, until by the aid of the imagination and wrong interpretation
the home is made a hell and divorce a necessity. Let it be remembered,
there can be no true love without perfect and absolute confidence. Jealousy
is always the sign of weakness or madness. Avoid a jealous disposition, for
it is an open acknowledgment of a lack of faith.

[Illustration]

{222}

The Improvement of Offspring.

       *       *       *       *       *

Why Bring Into the World Idiots, Fools, Criminals and Lunatics?

[Illustration: The Mother's Good Night Prayer.]

1. THE RIGHT WAY.--When mankind will properly love and marry and then
rightly generate, carry, nurse and educate their children, will they in
deed and in truth carry out {223} the holy and happy purpose of their
Creator. See those miserable and depraved scape-goats of humanity, the
demented simpletons, the half-crazy, unbalanced multitudes which infest our
earth, and fill our prisons with criminals and our poor-houses with
paupers. Oh! the boundless capabilities and perfections of our God-like
nature and, alas! its deformities! All is the result of the ignorance or
indifference of parents. As long as children are the accidents of lust
instead of the premeditated objects of love, so long will the offspring
deteriorate and the world be cursed with deformities, monstrosities,
unhumanities and cranks.

2. EACH AFTER ITS KIND.--"Like parents like children." "In their own image
beget" they them. In what other can they? "How can a corrupt tree bring
forth good fruit?" How can animal propensities in parents generate other
than depraved children, or moral purity beget beings other than as holy by
nature as those at whose hands they received existence and constitution?

3. AS ARE THE PARENTS, physically, mentally and morally when they stamp
their own image and likeness upon progeny, so will be the constitution of
that progeny.

4. "JUST AS THE TWIG IS BENT THE TREE'S INCLINED."--Yet the bramble cannot
be bent to bear delicious peaches, nor the sycamore to bear grain.
Education is something, but _parentage_ is _everything_; because it "_dyes
in the wool_," and thereby exerts an influence on character almost
infinitely more powerful than all other conditions put together.

5. HEALTHY AND BEAUTIFUL CHILDREN.--Thoughtless mortal! Before you allow
the first goings forth of love, learn what the parental conditions in you
mean, and you will confer a great boon upon the prospective bone of your
bone, and flesh of your flesh! If it is in your power to be the parent of
beautiful, healthy, moral and talented children instead of diseased and
depraved, is it not your imperious duty then, to impart to them that
physical power, moral perfection, and intellectual capability, which shall
ennoble their lives and make them good people and good citizens?

6. PAUSE AND TREMBLE.--Prospective parents! Will you trifle with the
dearest interests of your children? Will you in matters thus momentous,
head-long rush

 "Where angels dare not tread?"

Seeking only mere animal indulgence?--Well might cherubim shrink from
assuming responsibilities thus momentous! Yet, how many parents tread this
holy ground completely unprepared, and almost as thoughtlessly and
ignorantly as brutes--entailing even loathsome diseases and {224} sensual
propensities upon the fruit of their own bodies. Whereas they are bound, by
obligations the most imperious, to bestow on them a good physical
organization, along with a pure, moral, and strong intellectual
constitution, or else not to become parents! Especially since it is easier
to generate human angels than devils incarnate.

7. HEREDITARY DESCENT.--This great law of things, "Hereditary Descent,"
fully proves and illustrates in any required number and variety of cases,
showing that progeny inherits the constitutional natures and characters,
mental and physical, of parents, including pre-dispositions to consumption,
insanity, all sorts of disease, etc., as well as longevity, strength,
stature, looks, disposition, talents,--all that is constitutional. From
what other source do or can they come? Indeed, who can doubt a truth as
palpable as that children inherit some, and if some, therefore all, the
physical and mental nature and constitution of parents, thus becoming
almost their fac-similes?

8. ILLUSTRATIONS.--A whaleman was severely hurt by a harpooned and
desperate whale turning upon the small boat, and, by his monstrous jaws,
smashing it to pieces, one of which, striking him in his right side,
crippled him for life. When sufficiently recovered, he married, according
to previous engagement, and his daughter, born in due time, and closely
resembling him in looks, constitution and character, has a weak and sore
place corresponding in location with that of the injury of her father.
Tubercles have been found in the lungs of infants at birth, born of
consumptive parents,--a proof, clear and demonstrative, that children
inherit the several states of parental physiology existing at the time they
received their physiological constitution. The same is true of the
transmission of those diseases consequent on the violation of the law of
chastity, and the same conclusion established thereby.

9. PARENT'S PARTICIPATION.--Each parent furnishing an indispensable portion
of the materials of life, and somehow or other, contributes parentally to
the formation of the constitutional character of their joint product,
appears far more reasonable, than to ascribe, as many do, the whole to
either, some to paternity, others to maternity. Still this decision go
which way it may, does not affect the great fact that children inherit both
the physiology and the mentality existing in parents at the time they
received being and constitution.

10. ILLEGITIMATES OR BASTARDS also furnish strong proof of the correctness
of this our leading doctrine. They are generally lively, sprightly, witty,
frolicsome, knowing, {225} quick of perception, apt to learn, full of
passion, quick-tempered, impulsive throughout, hasty, indiscreet, given to
excesses, yet abound in good feeling, and are well calculated to enjoy
life, though in general sadly deficient in some essential moral elements.

11. CHARACTER OF ILLEGITIMATES.--Wherein, then, consists this difference?
First, in "novelty lending an enchantment" rarely experienced in sated
wedlock, as well as in power of passion sufficient to break through all
restraint, external and internal; and hence their high wrought
organization. They are usually wary and on the alert, and their parents
drank "stolen waters." They are commonly wanting in moral balance, or else
delinquent in some important moral aspect; nor would they have ever been
born unless this had been the case, for the time being at least, with their
parents. Behold in these, and many other respects easily cited, how
striking the coincidence between their characters on the one hand, and, on
the other, those parental conditions necessarily attendant on their origin.

12. CHILDREN'S CONDITION depends upon parents' condition at the time of the
sexual embrace. Let parents recall, as nearly as may be their circumstances
and states of body and mind at this period, and place them by the side of
the physical and mental constitutions of their children, and then say
whether this law is not a great practical truth, and if so, its importance
is as the happiness and misery it is capable of affecting! The application
of this mighty engine of good or evil to mankind, to the promotion of human
advancement, is the great question which should profoundly interest all
parents.

13. THE VITAL PERIOD.--The physical condition of parents at the vital
period of transmission of life should be a perfect condition of health in
both body and mind, and a rigorous condition of all the animal organs and
functions.

14. MUSCULAR PREPARATION.--Especially should parents cultivate their
muscular system preparatory to the perfection of this function, and of
their children; because, to impart strength and stamina to offspring they
must of necessity both possess a good muscular organization, and also bring
it into vigorous requisition at this period. For this reason, if for no
other, let those of sedentary habits cultivate muscular energy preparatory
to this time of need.

15. THE SEED.--So exceedingly delicate are the seeds of life, that, unless
planted in a place of perfect security, they must all be destroyed, and our
race itself extinguished. And what place is as secure as that chosen, where
they can {226} be reached only with the utmost difficulty, and than only at
the peril of even life itself? Imperfect seed sown in poor ground means a
sickly harvest.

16. HEALTHY PEOPLE--MOST CHILDREN.--The most healthy classes have the most
numerous families; but that, as luxury enervates society, it diminishes the
population, by enfeebling parents, nature preferring none rather than those
too weakly to live and be happy, and thereby rendering that union
unfruitful which is too feeble to produce offspring sufficiently strong to
enjoy life. Debility and disease often cause barrenness. Nature seems to
rebel against sickly offspring.

17. WHY CHILDREN DIE.--Inquire whether one or both the parents of those
numerous children that die around us, have not weak lungs, or a debilitated
stomach, or a diseased liver, or feeble muscles, or else use them but
little, or disordered nerves, or some other debility or form of disease.
The prevalence of summer complaints, colic, cholera infantum, and other
affections of these vital organs of children is truly alarming, sweeping
them into their graves by the million. Shall other animals rear nearly all
their young, and shall man, constitutionally by far the strongest of them
all, lose half or more of his? Is this the order of nature? No, but their
death-worm is born in and with them, and by parental agency.

18. GRAVE-YARD STATISTICS.--Take grave-yard statistics in August, and then
say, whether most of the deaths of children are not caused by indigestion,
or feebleness of the bowels, liver, etc., or complaints growing out of
them? Rather, take family statistics from broken-hearted parents! And yet,
in general, those very parents who thus suffer more than words can tell,
were the first and main transgressors, because they entailed those
dyspeptic, heart, and other kindred affections so common among American
parents upon their own children, and thereby almost as bad as killed them
by inches; thus depriving them of the joys of life, and themselves of their
greatest earthly treasure!

19. ALL CHILDREN MAY DIE.--Children may indeed die whose parents are
healthy, but they almost must whose parents are essentially ailing in one
or more of their vital organs; because, since they inherit this organ
debilitated or diseased, any additional cause of sickness attacks this part
first, and when it gives out, all go by the board together.

20. PARENTS MUST LEARN AND OBEY.--How infinitely more virtuous and happy
would your children be if you should be healthy in body, and happy in mind,
so as to beget in {227} them a constitutionally healthy and vigorous
physiology, along with a serene and happy frame of mind! Words are utterly
powerless in answer, and so is everything but a lifetime of consequent
happiness or misery! Learn and obey, then, the laws of life and health,
that you may both reap the rich reward yourself, and also shower down upon
your children after you, blessings many and most exalted. Avoid excesses of
all kinds, be temperate, take good care of the body and avoid exposures and
disease, and your children will be models of health and beauty.

21. THE RIGHT CONDITION.--The great practical inference is, that those
parents who desire intellectual and moral children, must love each other;
because, this love, besides perpetually calling forth and cultivating their
higher faculties, awakens them to the highest pitch of exalted action in
that climax, concentration, and consummation of love which propagates their
existing qualities, the mental endowment of offspring being proportionate
to the purity and intensity of parental love.

22. THE EFFECTS.--The children of affectionate parents receive existence
and constitution when love has rendered the mentality of their parents both
more elevated and more active than it is by nature, of course the children
of loving parents are both more intellectual and moral by nature than their
parents. Now, if these children and their companions also love one another,
this same law which renders the second generation better than the first,
will of course render the third still better than the second, and thus of
all succeeding generations.

23. ANIMAL IMPULSE.--You may preach and pray till doomsday--may send out
missionaries, may circulate tracts and Bibles, and multiply revivals and
all the means of grace, with little avail; because, as long as mankind go
on, as now, to propagate by animal impulse, so long must their offspring be
animal, sensual, devilish! But only induce parents cordially to love each
other, and you thereby render their children constitutionally talented and
virtuous. Oh! parents, by as much as you prefer the luxuries of concord to
the torments of discord, and children that are sweet dispositioned and
highly intellectual to those that are rough, wrathful, and depraved, be
entreated to "_love one another_."

[Illustration]

       *       *       *       *       *


{229}

Too Many Children.

[Illustration: JUST HOME FROM SCHOOL.]

1. LESSENING PAUPERISM.--Many of the agencies for lessening pauperism are
afraid of tracing back its growth to the frequency of births under wretched
conditions. One begins to question whether after all sweet charity or
dignified philanthropy has not acted with an unwise reticence. Among the
problems which defy practical handling this is the most complicated. The
pauperism which arises from marriage is the result of the worst elements of
character legalized. In America, where the boundaries of wedlock are
practically boundless, it is not desirable, even were it possible, that the
state should regulate marriage much further than it now does; therefore
must the sociologist turn for aid to society in his struggle with
pauperism.

2. RIGHT PHYSICAL AND SPIRITUAL CONDITIONS OF BIRTH.--Society should insist
upon the right spiritual and physical conditions for birth. It should be
considered more than "a pity" when another child is born into a home too
poor to receive it. The underlying selfishness of such an event should be
recognized, for it brings motherhood under wrong conditions of health and
money. Instead of each birth being the result of mature consideration and
hallowed love, children are too often born as animals are born. To be sure
the child has a father whom he can call by name. Better that there had
never been a child.

3. WRONG RESULTS.--No one hesitates to declare that it is want of
self-respect and morality which brings wrong results outside of marriage,
but it is also the want of them which begets evil inside the marriage
relation. Though there is nothing more difficult than to find the
equilibrium between self-respect and self-sacrifice, yet on success in
finding it depends individual and national preservation. The fact of being
wife and mother or husband and father should imply dignity and joyousness,
no matter how humble the home.

4. DIFFERENCE OF OPINION AMONGST PHYSICIANS.--In regard to teaching, the
difficulties are great. As soon as one advances beyond the simplest
subjects of hygiene, one is met with the difference of opinions among
physicians. When each one has a different way of making a mustard plaster,
no wonder that each has his own notions about everything else. One doctor
recommends frequent births, another advises against them.

5. DIFFERENT NATURES.--If physiological facts are taught to a large class,
there are sure to be some in it whose impressionable natures are excited by
too much plain {230} speaking, while there are others who need the most
open teaching in order to gain any benefit. Talks to a few persons
generally are wiser than popular lectures. Especially are talks needed by
mothers and unmothered girls who come from everywhere to the city.

6. BOYS AND YOUNG MEN.--It is not women alone who require the shelter of
organizations and instruction, but boys and young men. There is no double
standard of morality, though the methods of advocating it depend upon the
sex which is to be instructed. Men are more concerned with the practical
basis of morality than with its sentiment, and with the pecuniary aspects
of domestic life than with its physical and mental suffering. We all may
need medicine for moral ills, yet the very intangibleness of purity makes
us slow to formulate rules for its growth. Under the guidance of the wise
in spirit and knowledge, much can be done to create a higher standard of
marriage and to proportion the number of births according to the health and
income of parents.

7. FOR THE SAKE OF THE STATE.--If the home exists primarily for the sake of
the individual, it exists secondarily for the sake of the state. Therefore,
any home into which are continually born the inefficient children of
inefficient parents, not only is a discomfort in itself, but it also
furnishes members for the armies of the unemployed, which are tinkering and
hindering legislation and demanding by the brute force of numbers that the
state shall support them.

8. OPINIONS FROM HIGH AUTHORITIES.--In the statements and arguments made in
the above we have not relied upon our own opinions and convictions, but
have consulted the best authorities, and we hereby quote some of the
highest authorities upon this subject.

9. REV. LEONARD DAWSON.--"How rapidly conjugal prudence might lift a nation
out of pauperism was seen in France.--Let them therefore hold the maxim
that the production of offspring with forethought and providence is
rational nature. It was immoral to bring children into the world whom they
could not reasonably hope to feed, clothe and educate."

10. MRS. FAWCETT.--"Nothing will permanently offset pauperism while the
present reckless increase of population continues."

11. DR. GEORGE NAPHEYS.--"Having too many children unquestionably has its
disastrous effects on both mother and {231} children as known to every
intelligent physician. Two-thirds of all cases of womb disease, says Dr.
Tilt, are traceable to child-bearing in feeble women. There are also women
to whom pregnancy is a nine months' torture, and others to whom it is
nearly certain to prove fatal. Such a condition cannot be discovered before
marriage--The detestable crime of abortion is appallingly rife in our day.
It is abroad in our land to an extent which would have shocked the
dissolute women of pagan Rome--This wholesale, fashionable murder, how are
we to stop it? Hundreds of vile men and women in our large cities subsist
by this slaughter of the innocent."

12. REV. H. R. HAWEIS.--"Until it is thought a disgrace in every rank of
society, from top to bottom of social scale, to bring into the world more
children than you are able to provide for, the poor man's home, at least,
must often be a purgatory--his children dinnerless, his wife a
beggar--himself too often drunk--here, then, are the real remedies: first,
control the family growth according to the family means of support."

13. MONTAGUE COOKSON.--"The limitation of the number of the family--is as
much the duty of married persons as the observance of chastity is the duty
of those that are unmarried."

14. JOHN STUART MILL.--"Every one has aright to live. We will suppose this
granted. But no one has a right to bring children into life to be supported
by other people. Whoever means to stand upon the first of these rights must
renounce all pretension to the last. Little improvement can be expected in
morality until the production of a large family is regarded in the same
light as drunkenness or any other physical excess."

15. DR. T. D. NICHOLLS.--"In the present social state, men and women should
refrain from having children unless they see a reasonable prospect of
giving them suitable nurture and education."

16. REV. M. J. SAVAGE.--"Some means ought to be provided for checking the
birth of sickly children."

17. DR. STOCKHAM.--"Thoughtful minds must acknowledge the great wrong done
when children are begotten under adverse conditions. Women must learn the
laws of life so as to protect themselves, and not be the means of bringing
sin-cursed, diseased children into the world. The remedy is in the
prevention of pregnancy, not in producing abortion."

       *       *       *       *       *


{232}

Small Families and the Improvement of the Race.

1. MARRIED PEOPLE MUST DECIDE FOR THEMSELVES.--It is the fashion of those
who marry nowadays to have few children, often none. Of course this is a
matter which married people must decide for themselves. As is stated in an
earlier chapter, sometimes this policy is the wisest that can be pursued.

[Illustration]

2. DISEASED PEOPLE.--Diseased people who are likely to beget only a sickly
offspring, may follow this course, and so may thieves, rascals, vagabonds,
insane and drunken persons, and all those who are likely to bring into the
world beings that ought not to be here. But why so many well-to-do folks
should pursue a policy adapted only to paupers and criminals, is not easy
to explain. Why marry at all if not to found a family that shall live to
bless and make glad the earth after father and mother are gone? It is not
wise to rear too many children, nor is it wise to have too few. Properly
brought up, they will make home a delight and parents happy.

3. POPULATION LIMITED.--Galton, in his great work on hereditary genius,
observes that "the time may hereafter arrive in far distant years, when the
population of this earth shall be kept as strictly within bounds of number
and suitability of race, as the sheep of a well-ordered moor, or the plants
in an orchard-house; in the meantime, let us do what we can to encourage
the multiplication of the races best {233} fitted to invent and conform to
a high and generous civilization."

4. SHALL SICKLY PEOPLE RAISE CHILDREN?--The question whether sickly people
should marry and propagate their kind, is briefly alluded to in an early
chapter of this work. Where father and mother are both consumptive the
chances are that the children will inherit physical weakness, which will
result in the same disease, unless great pains are taken to give them a
good physical education, and even then the probabilities are that they will
find life a burden hardly worth living.

5. NO REAL BLESSING.--Where one parent is consumptive and the other
vigorous, the chances are just half as great. If there is a scrofulous or
consumptive taint in the blood, beware! Sickly children are no comfort to
their parents, no real blessing. If such people marry, they had better, in
most cases, avoid parentage.

6. WELFARE OF MANKIND.--The advancement of the welfare of mankind is a most
intricate problem: all ought to refrain from marriage who cannot avoid
abject poverty for their children; for poverty is not only a great evil,
but tends to its own increase by leading to recklessness in marriage. On
the other hand, as Mr. Galton has remarked, if the prudent avoid marriage,
while the reckless marry, the inferior members will tend to supplant the
better members of society.

7. PREVENTIVES.--Remember that the thousands of preventives which are
advertised in papers, private circulars, etc., are not only inefficient,
unreliable and worthless, but positively dangerous, and the annual
mortality of females in this country from this cause alone is truly
horrifying. Study nature, and nature's laws alone will guide you safely in
the path of health and happiness.

8. NATURE'S REMEDY.--Nature in her wise economy has prepared for
overproduction, for during the period of pregnancy and nursing, and also
most of the last half of each menstrual month, woman is naturally sterile;
but this condition may become irregular and uncertain on account of
stimulating drinks or immoral excesses.

[Illustration]

{234}

The Generative Organs.

[Illustration]

THE MALE GENERATIVE ORGANS AND THEIR STRUCTURE AND ADAPTATION.

1. The reproductive organs in man are the penis and testicles and their
appendages.

2. The penis deposits the seminal life germ of the male. It is designed to
fulfill the seed planting mission of human life.

3. In the accompanying illustration all the parts are named.

4. URETHRA.--The urethra performs the important mission of emptying the
bladder, and is rendered very much larger by the passion, and the semen is
propelled along through it by little layers of muscles on each side meeting
{235} above and below. It is this canal that is inflamed by the disease
known as gonorrhoea.

5. PROSTRATE GLAND.--The prostrate gland is located just before the
bladder. It swells in men who have previously overtaxed it, thus preventing
all sexual intercourse, and becomes very troublesome to void urine. This is
a very common trouble in old age.

6. THE PENAL GLAND.--The penal gland, located at the end of the penis,
becomes unduly enlarged by excessive action and has the consistency of
India rubber. It is always enlarged by erection. It is this gland at the
end that draws the semen forward. It is one of the most essential and
wonderful constructed glands of the human body.

7. FEMALE MAGNETISM.--When the male organ comes in contact with female
magnetism, the natural and proper excitement takes place. When excited
without this female magnetism it becomes one of the most serious injuries
to the human body. The male organ was made for a high and holy purpose, and
woe be to him who pollutes his manhood by practicing the secret vice. He
pays the penalty in after years either by the entire loss of sexual power,
or by the afflictions of various urinary diseases.

8. NATURE PAYS all her debts, and when there is an abuse of organ,
penalties must follow. If the hand is thrust into the fire it will be
burnt.

       *       *       *       *       *

THE FEMALE SEXUAL ORGANS.

       *       *       *       *       *

[Illustration: ANATOMY OR STRUCTURE OF THE FEMALE ORGANS OF GENERATION.]

1. The generative or reproductive organs of the human female are usually
divided into the internal and external. Those regarded as internal are
concealed from view and protected within the body. Those that can be
readily perceived are termed external. The entrance of the vagina may be
stated as the line of demarcation of the two divisions. {236}

[Illustration: Impregnated Egg. In the first formation of Embryo.]

2. HYMEN OR VAGINAL VALVE.--This is a thin membrane of half moon shape
stretched across the opening of the vagina. It usually contains before
marriage one or more small openings for the passage of the menses. This
membrane has been known to cause much distress in many females at the first
menstrual flow. The trouble resulting from the openings in the hymen not
being large enough to let the flow through and consequently blocking up the
vaginal canal, and filling the entire {237} internal sexual organs with
blood; causing paroxysms and hysterics and other alarming symptoms. In such
cases the hymen must be ruptured that a proper discharge may take place at
once.

3. UNYIELDING HYMEN.--The hymen is usually ruptured by the first sexual
intercourse, but sometimes it is so unyielding as to require the aid of a
knife before coition can take place.

4. THE PRESENCE OF THE HYMEN was formerly considered a test of virginity,
but this theory is no longer held by competent authorities, as disease or
accidents or other circumstances may cause its rupture.

5. THE OVARIES.--The ovaries are little glands for the purpose of forming
the female ova or egg. They are not fully developed until the period of
puberty, and usually are about the size of a large chestnut. The are
located in the broad ligaments between the uterus and the Fallopian tubes.
During pregnancy the ovaries change position; they are brought farther into
the abdominal cavity as the uterus expands.

6. OFFICE OF THE OVARY.--The ovary is to the female what the testicle is to
the male. It is the germ vitalizing organ and the most essential part of
the generative apparatus. The ovary is not only an organ for the formation
of the ova, but is also designed for their separation when they reach
maturity.

7. FALLOPIAN TUBES.--These are the ducts that lead from the ovaries to the
uterus. They are entirely detached from the glands or ovaries, and are
developed on both sides of the body.

8. OFFICE OF THE FALLOPIAN TUBES.--The Fallopian tubes have a double
office: receiving the ova from the ovaries and conducting it into the
uterus, as well as receiving the spermatic fluid of the male and conveying
it from the uterus in the direction of the ovaries, the tubes being the
seat of impregnation.

[Illustration: OVUM.]

9. STERILITY IN FEMALES.--Sterility in the female is sometimes caused by a
morbid adhesion of the tube to a portion of the ovary. By what power the
mouth of the tube is directed toward a particular portion of an ovary from
which the ovum is about to be discharged, remains entirely unknown, as does
also the precise nature of the cause which effects this movement.

       *       *       *       *       *


{238}

THE MYSTERIES OF THE FORMATION OF LIFE.

[Illustration: Ripe Ovum from the Ovary.]

1. SCIENTIFIC THEORIES.--Darwin, Huxley, Haeckel, Tyndall, Meyer, and other
renowned scientists, have tried to find the _missing link_ between man and
animal; they have also exhausted their genius in trying to fathom the
mysteries of the beginning of life, or find where the animal and mineral
kingdoms unite to form life; but they have added to the vast accumulation
of theories only, and the world is but little wiser on this mysterious
subject.

2. PHYSIOLOGY.--Physiology has demonstrated what physiological changes take
place in the germination and formation of life, and how nature expresses
the intentions of reproduction by giving animals distinctive organs with
certain secretions for this purpose, etc. All the different stages of
development can be easily determined, but how and why life takes place
under such special condition and under no other, is an unsolved mystery.

3. OVARIES.--The ovaries are the essential parts of the generative system
of the human female in which ova are matured. There are two ovaries, one on
each side of the uterus, and connected with it by the Fallopian tubes. They
are egg-shaped, about an inch in diameter, and furnish the {239} germs or
ovules. These germs or ovules are very small, measuring about 1/120 of an
inch in diameter.

4. DEVELOPMENT.--The ovaries develop with the growth of the female, so that
finally at the period of puberty they ripen and liberate an ovum or germ
vesicle, which is carried into the uterine cavity of the Fallopian tubes.
By the aid of the microscope we find that these ova are composed of
granular substance, in which is found a miniature yolk surrounded by a
transparent membrane called the zona pellucida. This yolk contains a
germinal vesicle in which can be discovered a nucleus, called the germinal
spot. The process of the growth of the ovaries is very gradual, and their
function of ripening and discharging one ovum monthly into the Fallopian
tubes and uterus, is not completed until between the twelfth and fifteenth
years.

5. WHAT SCIENCE KNOWS.--After the sexual embrace we know that the sperm is
lifted within the genital passages or portion of the vagina and mouth of
the uterus. The time between the deposit of the semen and fecundation
varies according to circumstances. If the sperm-cell travels to the ovarium
it generally takes from three to five days to make the journey. As Dr.
Pierce says: "The transportation is aided by the ciliary processes (little
hairs) of the mucous surface of the vaginal and uterine walls, as well as
by its own vibratile movements. The action of the cilia, under the stimulus
of the sperm, seems to be from without, inward. Even if a minute particle
of sperm, less than a drop, be left upon the margin of the external
genitals of the female, it is sufficient in amount to impregnate, and can
be carried, by help of these cilia, to the ovaries."

6. CONCEPTION.--After intercourse at the proper time the liability to
conception is very great. If the organs are in a healthy condition,
conception must necessarily follow, and no amount of prudence and the most
rigid precautions often fail to prevent pregnancy.

7. ONLY ONE ABSOLUTELY SAFE METHOD.--There is only one absolutely safe
method to prevent conception, entirely free from danger and injury to
health, and one that is in the reach of all; that is to refrain from union
altogether.

[Illustration]

{240}

PREVENTION OF CONCEPTION.

[Illustration: THE PATIENT MOTHER.]

1. The question is always asked, "Can Conception be prevented at all
times?" Certainly, this is possible; but such an interference with nature's
laws is inadmissible, and perhaps never to be justified in any case
whatever, except in cases of deformity or disease.

2. If the parties of a marriage are both feeble and so adapted to each
other that their children are deformed, insane or idiots, then to beget
offspring would be a flagrant wrong; if the mother's health is in such a
condition as to forbid the right of laying the burden of motherhood upon
her, then medical aid may safely come to her relief. If the man, however,
respects his wife, he ought to come to her relief without the counsel of a
physician. {241}

3. FORBEARANCE.--Often before the mother has recovered from the effects of
bearing, nursing and rearing one child, ere she has regained proper tone
and vigor of body and mind, she is unexpectedly overtaken, surprised by the
manifestation of symptoms which again indicate pregnancy. Children thus
begotten cannot become hardy and long-lived. By the love that parents may
feel for their posterity, by the wishes for their success, by the hopes for
their usefulness, by every consideration for their future well-being, let
them exercise precaution and forbearance until the wife becomes
sufficiently healthy and enduring to bequeath her own rugged, vital stamina
to the child she bears in love.

4. IMPOSTORS.--During the past few years hundreds of books and pamphlets
have been written on the subject, claiming that new remedies had been
discovered for the prevention of conception, etc., but these are all money
making devices to deceive the public, and enrich the pockets of miserable
and unprincipled impostors.

5. THE FOLLIES OF PREVENTION.--Dr. Pancoast, an eminent authority, says:
"The truth is, there is no medicine taken internally capable of preventing
conception, and the person who asserts to the contrary, not only speaks
falsely, but is both a knave and a fool. It is true enough that remedies
may be taken to produce abortion after conception occurs; but those who
prescribe and those who resort to such desperate expedients, can only be
placed in the category of lunatics and assassins!"

6. PATENT MEDICINES.--If nature does not promptly respond, there are many
patent medicines which when taken at the time the monthly flow is to begin,
will produce the desired result. Let women beware; for it is only a
question of a few years when their constitution, complexion, and health
will be a sorry evidence of their folly. The woman who continually takes a
drug to prevent conception, cannot retain her natural complexion; her eyes
will become dull, her cheeks flabby, and she will show various evidences of
poor health, and her sexual organs will soon become permanently impaired
and hopelessly diseased.

7. FOOLISH DREAD OF CHILDREN.--What is more deplorable and pitiable than an
old couple childless. Young people dislike the care and confinement of
children and prefer society and social entertainments and thereby do great
injustice and injury to their health and fit themselves in later years to
visit infirmities and diseases upon their children. The vigilant and rigid
measures which have to be resorted to in order to prevent conception for a
period of years unfits many a wife for the production of healthy children.
{242}

8. HAVING CHILDREN under proper circumstances never ruins the health and
happiness of any woman. In fact, womanhood is incomplete without them. She
may have a dozen or more, and still have better health than before
marriage. It is having them too close together, and when she is not in a
fit state, that her health gives way. Sometimes the mother is diseased; the
outlet from the womb, as a result of laceration by a previous child-birth,
is frequently enlarged, thus allowing conception to take place very
readily, and hence she has children in rapid succession.

Besides the wrong to the mother in having children in such rapid
succession, it is a great injustice to the babe in the womb and the one at
the breast that they should follow each other so quickly that one is
conceived while the other is nursing. One takes the vitality of the other;
neither has sufficient nourishment, and both are started in life stunted
and incomplete.

9. "THE DESIRABILITY AND PRACTICABILITY of limiting offspring," says Dr.
Stockham, "are the subject of frequent inquiry. Fewer and better children
are desired by right-minded parents. Many men and women, wise in other
things of the world, permit generation as a chance result of copulation,
without thought of physical or mental conditions to be transmitted to the
child. Coition, the one important act of all others, carrying with it the
most vital results, is usually committed for selfish gratification. Many a
drunkard owes his life-long appetite for alcohol to the fact that the
inception of his life could be traced to a night of dissipation on the part
of his father. Physical degeneracy and mental derangements are too often
caused by the parents producing offspring while laboring under great mental
strain or bodily fatigue. Drunkenness and licentiousness are frequently the
heritage of posterity. Future generations demand that such results be
averted by better pre-natal influences. The world is groaning under the
curse of chance parenthood. It is due to posterity that procreation be
brought under the control of reason and conscience.

10. "IT HAS BEEN FEARED THAT A KNOWLEDGE of means to prevent conception
would, if generally diffused, be abused by women; that they would to so
great an extent escape motherhood as to bring about social disaster. This
fear is not well founded. The maternal instinct is inherent and sovereign
in woman. Even the pre-natal influences of a murderous intent on the part
of parents scarcely ever {243} eradicate it. With this natural desire for
children, we believe few women would abuse the knowledge or privilege of
controlling conception. Although women shrink from forced maternity, and
from the bearing of children under the great burden of suffering, as well
as other adverse conditions, it is rare to find a woman who is not greatly
disappointed if she does not, some time in her life, wear the crown of
motherhood.

"An eminent lady teacher, in talking to her pupils, once said: 'The
greatest calamity that can befall a woman is never to have a child. The
next greatest calamity is to have one only.' From my professional
experience I am happy to testify that more women seek to overcome causes of
sterility than to obtain knowledge of limiting the size of the family or
means to destroy the embryo. Also, if consultation for the latter is
sought, it is usually at the instigation of the husband. Believing in the
rights of unborn children, and in the maternal instinct, I am consequently
convinced that no knowledge should be withheld that will secure proper
conditions for the best parenthood.

11. "MANY OF THE MEANS USED TO PREVENT conception are injurious, and often
lay the foundation for a train of physical ailments. Probably no one means
is more serious in its results than the practice of withdrawal, or the
discharge of the semen externally to the vagina. The act is incomplete and
unnatural, and is followed by results similar to and as disastrous as those
consequent upon _masturbation_. In the male it may result in impotence, in
the female in sterility. In both sexes many nervous symptoms are produced,
such as headache, defective vision, dyspepsia, insomnia, loss of memory,
etc. Very many cases of uterine diseases can be attributed solely to this
practice. The objection to the use of the syringe is that if the sperm has
passed into the uterus the fluid cannot reach it. A cold fluid may, in some
instances, produce contractions to throw it off, but cannot be relied
upon."

12. IS IT EVER RIGHT TO PREVENT CONCEPTION? We submit the following case of
the _Juke_ family, mostly of New York State, as related by R. L. Dugdale,
when a member of the Prison Association, and let the reader judge for
himself:

"It was traced out by painstaking research that from one woman called
Margaret, who, like Topsy, merely 'growed' without pedigree as a pauper in
a village on the upper Hudson, about eighty-five years ago, there descended
673 {244} children, grandchildren, and great-grandchildren, of whom 200
were criminals of the dangerous class, 280 adult paupers, and fifty
prostitutes, while 300 children of her lineage died prematurely. The last
fact proves to what extent in this family nature was kind to the rest of
humanity in saving it from a still larger aggregation of undesirable and
costly members, for it is estimated that the expense to the State of the
descendants of Maggie was over a million dollars, and the State itself did
something also towards preventing a greater expense by the restrain
exercised upon the criminals, paupers, and idiots of the family during a
considerable portion of their lives."

13. THE LEGAL ASPECT.--By the Revised Statutes of the United States it is
provided "that no obscene, * * * or lascivious book, picture, or any
article or thing designed or intended for the prevention of conception or
producing of abortion shall be carried in the mail, and any person who
shall knowingly deposit or cause to be deposited for mailing or delivery
any of the hereinbefore mentioned things shall be guilty of misdemeanor,"
etc. In New Jersey, Oregon, South Carolina, Texas and District of Columbia
we find no local law against abortion. Nine states, viz.: New Hampshire,
Connecticut, New York, Indiana, Wisconsin, Dakotas, Wyoming and California
punish the woman upon whom the abortion is attempted; while Massachusetts,
New York, Ohio, Indiana, Michigan, Nebraska, Kansas and California punish
the advertising or furnishing of means for the prevention of conception;
and Ohio makes it a crime to even have such means in one's possession.
There is exception made in favor of every case where the early birth of the
infant is necessary to save the life of the mother. It will be noticed that
the common law punishes the furnishing or advertising of means for the
prevention of conception, and hence regards it as a crime. There is,
however, no ban of the civil law on Nature's law as laid down by Nature's
God and discovered by medical science, which we here make known.

14. IS NATURE'S METHOD RELIABLE?--Dr. Cowan says: "Sexual excitement
hastens the premature ripening and meeting of the germ cell with the sperm
cell, and impregnation may result, although intercourse occurs only in the
specified two weeks' absence of the egg from the uterus."

This is just possible under certain peculiar circumstances of diseased
conditions, or after long separation of husband and wife. However, it
seldom happens, and married people in normal health, temperate in the
sexual relation, desirous of controlling the size of their family, can
usually depend upon this law.

{245}

15. MODERATION.--Continence, self-control, a willingness to deny
himself--that is what is required from the husband. But a thousand voices
reach us from suffering women in all parts of the land that this will not
suffice; that men refuse thus to restrain themselves; that it leads to a
loss of domestic happiness and to illegal amour, or it is injurious
physically and morally; that, in short, such advice is useless because
impracticable.

16. NATURE'S METHOD.--To such we reply that Nature herself has provided, to
some extent, against over-production, and that it is well to avail
ourselves of her provision. It is well known that women, when nursing,
rarely become pregnant, and for this reason, if for no other, women should
nurse their own children, and continue the period until the child is at
least nine months or a year old. However, the nursing, if continued too
long, weakens both the mother and the child, and, moreover, ceases to
accomplish the end for which we now recommend it.

17. ANOTHER PROVISION OF NATURE.--For a certain period between her monthly
illness, every woman is sterile. Conception may be avoided by refraining
from coition except for this particular number of days, and there will be
no evasion of natural intercourse, no resort to disgusting practices, and
nothing degrading. The following facts have been established, without a
doubt: The Graafian Vesicle, containing the egg in the ovary, enlarges
during menstruation and bursts open to let the egg escape usually on the
first day after the flow ceases, and seldom, if ever, later than the fourth
day. It then takes from two to six days for the egg to pass down through
the Fallopian tube into the womb, where it remains from two to six days,
when, if not impregnated, it passes down through the vagina from the body.
After the egg has passed from the body, conception is not possible until
after the next menstrual flow.

The period, therefore, from after the sixteenth to within three days of the
following menstrual discharge is one of almost absolute safety. We say
within three days of the next menstruation, because the male seminal fluid
may be retained there till the egg leaves the ovary, and in that way
impregnation might follow. Impregnation would, however, rarely occur if the
period was extended to from the twelfth day after menstruation close up to
one day before it began again.

The above is the only physiological method (and it is no secret to a great
many people) by which conception can be limited, without the employment of
such means as involve danger and serious evils.

18. WARNING.--Let women be warned in the most emphatic manner against the
employment of the secret methods constantly advertised by quacks. Such
means are the almost certain cause of painful uterine diseases and of
shortened life. They are productive of more misery by far than
over-production itself.

{246}

[Illustration: [1]New Revelation for Women.]

VAGINAL CLEANLINESS.

1. The above Syringe has a patent tube known as the vaginal cleanser. This
keeps the sides of the vagina apart and permits the water to thoroughly
clean and cleanse the organ. It will be found a great relief in both health
and sickness, and in many cases cure barrenness and other diseases of the
womb. It can be used the same as any other syringe. The tube can be
procured at almost any drug store and applied to either bulb or fountain
syringe. Many women are barren on account of an acid secretion in the
vagina. The cleanser is almost a certain remedy and cure.

2. CLEANLINESS.--Cleanliness is next to godliness. Without cleanliness the
human body is more or less defiled and repulsive. A hint to the wise is
sufficient. The vagina should be cleansed with the same faithfulness as any
other portion of the body.

3. TEMPERATURE OF THE WATER.--Those not accustomed to use vaginal
injections would do well to use water milk-warm at the commencement; after
this the temperature may be varied according to circumstances. In case of
local inflammation use hot water. The indiscriminate use of cold water
injections will be found rather injurious than beneficial, and a woman in
feeble health will always find warm water invigorating and preferable.

{247}

4. LEUCORRHOEA.--In case of persistent leucorrhoea use the temperature of
water from seventy-two to eighty-five degrees Fahrenheit.

5. THE CLEANSER will greatly stimulate the health and spirits of any woman
who uses it. Pure water injections have a stimulating effect, and it seems
to invigorate the entire body.

6. SALT AND WATER INJECTIONS.--This will cure mild cases of leucorrhoea.
Add a teaspoonful of salt to a pint and a half of water at the proper
temperature. Injections may be repeated daily if deemed necessary.

7. SOAP AND WATER.--Soap and water is a very simple domestic remedy, and
will many times afford relief in many diseases of the womb. It seems it
thoroughly cleanses the parts. A little borax or vinegar may be used the
same as salt water injections. (See No. 6.)

8. STERILE WOMEN desiring offspring should seek sexual union soon after the
appearance of the menses, and not use the vaginal cleanser till several
days later. Those not desiring offspring should avoid copulation until the
ovum has passed the generative tract.

9. HOLES IN THE TUBES.--Most of the holes in the tubes of syringes are too
small. See that they are sufficiently large to produce thorough cleansing.

10. INJECTIONS DURING THE MONTHLY FLOW.--Of course it is not proper to
arrest the flow, and the injections will stimulate a healthy action of the
organs. The injections may be used daily throughout the monthly flow with
much comfort and benefit. If the flow is scanty and painful the injections
may be as warm as they can be comfortably borne. If the flowing is
immoderate, then cool water may be used. A woman will soon learn her own
condition and can act accordingly.

11. BLOOM AND GRACE OF YOUTH.--The regular bathing of the body will greatly
improve woman's beauty. Remember that a perfect complexion depends upon the
healthy action of all the organs. Vaginal injections are just as important
as the bath. A beautiful woman must not only be cleanly, but robust and
healthy. There can be no perfect beauty without good health.

[Illustration]

{248}

IMPOTENCE AND STERILITY.

[Illustration: Trying On a New Dress.]

1. Actual impotence during the period of manhood is a very rare complaint,
and nature very unwillingly, and only after the absolute neglect of
sanitary laws, gives up the power of reproduction.

2. Not only sensual women, but all without exception, feel deeply hurt, and
are repelled by the husband whom they may previously have loved dearly,
when, after entering the married state, they find that he is impotent. The
more inexperienced and innocent they were at the time of marriage, the
longer it often is before they find that something is lacking in the
husband; but, once knowing this, the wife infallibly has a feeling of
contempt and aversion for him; though there are many happy families where
this defect exists. It is often very uncertain who is the weak one, and no
cause for separation should be sought.

3. Unhappy marriages, barrenness, divorces, and perchance an occasional
suicide, may be prevented by the experienced physician, who can generally
give correct information, comfort, and consolation, when consulted on these
delicate matters.

4. When a single man fears that he is unable to fulfill the duties of
marriage, he should not marry until his fear is dispelled. The suspicion of
such a fear strongly tends to bring about the very weakness which he
dreads. Go to a good physician (not to one of those quacks whose {249}
advertisements you see in the papers; they are invariably unreliable), and
state the case fully and freely.

5. Diseases, malformation, etc., may cause impotence. In case of
malformation there is usually no remedy, but in case of disease it is
usually within the reach of a skillful physician.

6. Self-abuse and spermatorrhoea produce usually only temporary impotence
and can generally be relieved by carrying out the instructions given
elsewhere in this book.

7. Excessive indulgences often enfeeble the powers and often result in
impotence. Dissipated single men, professional libertines, and married men
who are immoderate, often pay the penalty of their violations of the laws
of nature, by losing their vital power. In such cases of excess there may
be some temporary relief, but as age advances the effects of such
indiscretion will become more and more manifest.

8. The condition of sterility in man may arise either from a condition of
the secretion which deprives it of its fecundating powers or it may spring
from a malformation which prevents it reaching the point where fecundation
takes place. The former condition is most common in old age, and is a
sequence of venereal disease, or from a change in the structure or
functions of the glands. The latter has its origin in a stricture, or in an
injury, or in that condition technically known as hypospadias, or in
debility.

9. It can be safely said that neither self-indulgence nor spermatorrhoea
often leads to permanent sterility.

10. It is sometimes, however, possible, even where there is sterility in
the male, providing the secretion is not entirely devoid of life properties
on part of the husband, to have children, but these are exceptions.

11. No man need hesitate about matrimony on account of sterility, unless
that condition arises from a permanent and absolute degeneration of his
functions.

12. Impotence from mental and moral causes often takes place. Persons of
highly nervous organization may suffer incapacity in their sexual organs.
The remedy for these difficulties is rest and change of occupation.

13. REMEDIES IN CASE OF IMPOTENCE ON ACCOUNT OF FORMER PRIVATE DISEASES, OR
MASTURBATION, OR OTHER CAUSES.--First build up the body by taking some good
stimulating tonics. The general health is the most essential feature to be
considered, in order to secure restoration of the sexual powers.
Constipation must be carefully avoided. If the {250} kidneys do not work in
good order, some remedy for their restoration must be taken. Take plenty of
out-door exercise, avoid horseback riding or heavy exhaustive work.

14. FOOD AND DRINKS WHICH WEAKEN DESIRE.--All kinds of food which cause
dyspepsia or bring on constipation, diarrhoea, or irritate the bowels,
alcoholic beverages, or any indigestible compound, has the tendency to
weaken the sexual power. Drunkards and tipplers suffer early loss of
vitality. Beer drinking has a tendency to irritate the stomach and to that
extent affects the private organs.

15. COFFEE.--Coffee drank excessively causes a debilitating effect upon the
sexual organs. The moderate use of coffee can be recommended, yet an
excessive habit of drinking very strong coffee will sometimes wholly
destroy vitality.

16. TOBACCO.--It is a hygienic and physiological fact that tobacco produces
sexual debility and those who suffer any weakness from that source should
carefully avoid the weed in all its forms.

17. DRUGS WHICH STIMULATE DESIRE.--There are certain medicines which act
locally on the membranes and organs of the male, and the papers are full of
advertisements of "Lost Manhood Restored", etc., but in every case they are
worthless or dangerous drugs and certain to lead to some painful malady or
death. All these patent medicines should be carefully avoided. People who
are troubled with any of these ailments should not attempt to doctor
themselves by taking drugs, but a competent physician should be consulted.
Eating rye, corn, or graham bread, oatmeal, cracked wheat, plenty of fruit,
etc. is a splendid medicine. If that is not sufficient, then a physician
should be consulted.

18. DRUGS WHICH MODERATE DESIRE.--Among one of the most common domestic
remedies is camphor. This has stood the test for ages. Small doses of half
a grain in most instances diminishes the sensibility of the organs of sex.
In some cases it produces irritation of the bladder. In that case it should
be at once discontinued. On the whole a physician had better be consulted.
The safest drug among domestic remedies is a strong tea made out of hops.
Saltpeter, or nitrate of potash, taken in moderate quantities, are very
good remedies.

{251}

19. STRICTLY SPEAKING there is a distinction made between _impotence_ and
_sterility_. _Impotence_ is a loss of power to engage in the sexual act and
is common to men. It may be imperfection in the male organ or a lack of
sufficient sexual vigor to produce and maintain erection. _Sterility_ is a
total loss of capacity in the reproduction of the species, and is common to
women.

There are, however, very few causes of barrenness that cannot be removed
when the patient is perfectly developed. Sterility, in a female, most
frequently depends upon a weakness or irritability either in the ovaries or
the womb, and anything having a strengthening effect upon either organ will
remove the disability. (See page 249.)

20. "OVER-INDULGENCE in intercourse," says Dr. Hoff, "is sometimes the
cause of barrenness; this is usually puzzling to the interested parties,
inasmuch as the practices which, in their opinion, should be the source of
a numerous progeny, have the very opposite effect. By greatly moderating
their ardor, this defect may be remedied."

21. "NAPOLEON AND JOSEPHINE.--A certain adaptation between the male and
female has been regarded as necessary to conception, consisting of some
mysterious influence which one sex exerts over the other, neither one,
however, being essentially impotent or sterile. The man may impregnate one
woman and not another, and the woman will conceive by one man and not by
another. In the marriage of Napoleon Bonaparte and Josephine no children
were born, but after he had separated from the Empress and wedded Maria
Louisa of Austria, an heir soon came. Yet Josephine had children by
Beauharnais, her previous husband. But as all is not known as to the
physical condition of Josephine during her second marriage, it cannot be
assumed that mere lack of adaptability was the cause of unfruitfulness
between them. There may have been some cause that history has not recorded,
or unknown to the state of medical science of those days. There are
doubtless many cases of apparently causeless unfruitfulness in marriage
that even physicians, with a knowledge of all apparent conditions in the
parties, cannot explain; but when, as elsewhere related in this volume,
impregnation by artificial means is successfully practised, it is useless
to attribute barrenness to purely psychological and adaptative influences."

       *       *       *       *       *


{252}

Producing Boys or Girls at Will.

1. CAN THE SEXES BE PRODUCED AT WILL?--This question has been asked in all
ages of the world. Many theories have been advanced, but science has at
last replied with some authority. The following are the best known
authorities which this age of science has produced.

2. THE AGRICULTURAL THEORY.--The agricultural theory, as it may be called,
because adopted by farmers, is that impregnation occurring within four days
of the close of the female monthlies produces a girl, because the ovum is
yet immature; but that when it occurs after the fourth day from its close,
gives a boy, because this egg is now mature; whereas after about the eighth
day this egg dissolves and passes off, so that impregnation is thereby
rendered impossible, till just before the mother's next monthly.--_Sexual
Science._

3. QUEEN BEES LAY FEMALE EGGS FIRST, and male afterwards. So with hens; the
first eggs laid after the tread give females, the last males. Mares shown
the stallion late in their periods drop horse colts rather than
fillies.--_Napheys._

4. IF YOU WISH FEMALES, give the male at the first sign of heat; if males,
at its end.--_Prof. Thury._

5. ON TWENTY-TWO SUCCESSIVE OCCASIONS I desired to have heifers, and
succeeded in every case. I have made in all twenty-nine experiments, after
this method, and succeeded in every one, in producing the sex I
desired.--_A Swiss Breeder._

6. THIS THURY PLAN has been tried on the farms of the Emperor of the French
with unvarying success.

7. CONCEPTION IN THE FIRST HALF of the time between the menstrual periods
produces females, and males is the latter.--_London Lancet._

8. INTERCOURSE in from two to six days after cessation of the menses
produces girls, in from nine to twelve, boys.--_Medical Reporter._

9. THE MOST MALE POWER and passion creates boys; female girls. This law
probably causes those agricultural facts just cited thus: Conception right
after menstruation give girls, because the female is then the most
impassioned; later, boys, because her wanting sexual warmth leaves him the
most vigorous. Mere sexual excitement, a wild, fierce, furious rush of
passion, is not only not sexual vigor, but in its inverse ratio; and a
genuine insane fervor caused by weakness; just as a like nervous
excitability indicates weak nerves instead of strong. Sexual power is
deliberate, not wild; cool, not impetuous; while all false excitement
diminishes effectiveness.--_Fowler._

       *       *       *       *       *


{253}

ABORTION OR MISCARRIAGE.

[Illustration: HEALTHY CHILDREN.]

1. ABORTION OR MISCARRIAGE is the expulsion of the child from the womb
previous to six months; after that it is called premature birth.

2. CAUSES.--It may be due to a criminal act of taking medicine for the
express purpose of producing miscarriage or it may be caused by certain
medicines, severe sickness or nervousness, syphilis, imperfect semen, lack
of room in the pelvis and abdomen, lifting, straining, violent cold, sudden
mental excitement, excessive sexual intercourse, dancing, tight lacing, the
use of strong purgative medicines, bodily fatigue, late suppers, and
fashionable amusements.

3. SYMPTOMS.--A falling or weakness and uneasiness in the region of the
loins, thighs and womb, pain in the small {254} of the back, vomiting and
sickness of the stomach, chilliness with a discharge of blood accompanied
with pain in the lower portions of the abdomen. These may take place in a
single hour, or it may continue for several days. If before the fourth
month, there is not so much danger, but the flow of blood is generally
greater. If miscarriage is the result of an accident, it generally takes
place without much warning, and the service of a physician should at once
be secured.

4. HOME TREATMENT.--A simple application of cold water externally applied
will produce relief, or cold cloths of ice, if convenient, applied to the
lower portions of the abdomen. Perfect quiet, however, is the most
essential thing for the patient. She should lie on her back and take
internally a teaspoonful of paregoric every two hours; drink freely of
lemonade or other cooling drinks, and for nourishment subsist chiefly on
chicken broth, toast, water gruel, fresh fruits, etc. The principal
homeopathic remedies for this disease are ergot and cimicifuga, given in
drop-doses of the tinctures.

5. INJURIOUS EFFECTS.--Miscarriage is a very serious difficulty, and the
health and the constitution may be permanently impaired. Any one prone to
miscarriage should adopt every measure possible to strengthen and build up
the system; avoid going up stairs or doing much heavy lifting or hard work.

6. PREVENTION.--Practice the laws of sexual abstinence, take frequent
sitz-baths, live on oatmeal, graham bread, and other nourishing diet. Avoid
highly seasoned food, rich gravies, late suppers and the like.

[Illustration]

{255}

The Murder of the Innocents.

[Illustration: AN INDIAN FAMILY. The Savage Indian Teaches Us Lessons of
Civilization.]

1. MANY CAUSES.--Many causes have operated to produce a corruption of the
public morals so deplorable; prominent among which may be mentioned the
facility with which divorces may be obtained in some of the States, the
constant promulgation of false ideas of marriage and its duties by means of
books, lectures, etc., and the distribution through the mails of impure
publications. But an influence not less powerful than any of these is the
growing devotion of fashion and luxury of this age, and the idea which
practically obtains to so great an extent that pleasure, instead of the
health or morals, is the great object of life.

2. A MONSTROUS CRIME.--The abiding interest we feel in the preservation of
the morals of our country, constrains us to raise our voice against the
daily increasing practice of {256} infanticide, especially before birth.
The notoriety this monstrous crime has obtained of late, and the hecatombs
of infants that are annually sacrificed to Moloch, to gratify an unlawful
passion, are a sufficient justification for our alluding to a painful and
delicate subject, which should "not even be named," only to correct and
admonish the wrong-doers.

3. LOCALITIES IN WHICH IT IS MOST PREVALENT.--We may observe that the
crying sin of infanticide is most prevalent in those localities where the
system of moral education has been longest neglected. This inhuman crime
might be compared to the murder of the innocents, except that the
criminals, in this case, exceed in enormity the cruelty of Herod.

4. SHEDDING INNOCENT BLOOD.--If it is a sin to take away the life even of
an enemy; if the crime of shedding innocent blood cries to heaven for
vengeance; in what language can we characterize the double guilt of those
whose souls are stained with the innocent blood of their own unborn,
unregenerated offspring?

5. THE GREATNESS OF THE CRIME.--The murder of an infant before its birth,
is, in the sight of God and the law, as great a crime as the killing of a
child after birth.

6. LEGAL RESPONSIBILITY.--Every State of the Union has made this offense
one of the most serious crimes. The law has no mercy for the offenders that
violate the sacred law of human life. It is murder of the most cowardly
character and woe to him who brings this curse upon his head, to haunt him
all the days of his or her life, and to curse him at the day of his death.

7. THE PRODUCT OF LUST.--Lust pure and simple. The only difference between
a marriage of this character and prostitution is, that society, rotten to
its heart, pulpits afraid to cry aloud against crime and vice, and the
church conformed to the world, have made such a profanation of marriage
respectable. To put it in other words, when two people determine to live
together as husband and wife, and evade the consequences and
responsibilities of marriage, they are simply engaged in prostitution
without the infamy which attaches to that vice and crime.

8. OUTRAGEOUS VIOLATION OF ALL LAW.--The violation of all law, both natural
and revealed, is the cool and villainous contract by which people entering
into the marital relation engage in defiance of the laws of God and the
laws of the commonwealth, that they shall be unincumbered with a family of
children. "Disguise the matter as you will," says Dr. Pomeroy, "yet the
fact remains that the first and {257} specific object of marriage is the
rearing of a family." "Be fruitful and multiply and replenish the earth,"
is God's first word to Adam after his creation.

9. THE NATIONAL SIN.--The prevention of offspring is preeminently the sin
of America. It is fast becoming the national sin of America, and if it is
not checked, it will sooner or later be an irremediable calamity. The sin
has its roots in a low and perverted idea of marriage, and is fostered by
false standards of modesty.

10. THE SIN OF HEROD.--Do these same white-walled sepulchres of hell know
that they are committing the damning sin of Herod in the slaughter of the
innocents, and are accessories before the fact to the crime of murder? Do
women in all circles of society, when practicing these terrible crimes
realize the real danger? Do they understand that it is undermining their
health, and their constitution, and that their destiny, if persisted in, is
a premature grave just as sure as the sun rises in the heavens? Let all
beware, and let the first and only purpose be, to live a life guiltless
before God and man.

11. THE CRIME OF ABORTION.--From the moment of conception a new life
commences; a new individual exists; another child is added to the family.
The mother who deliberately sets about to destroy this life, either by want
of care, or by taking drugs, or using instruments, commits as great a
crime, and is just as guilty as if she strangled her new-born infant or as
if she snatched from her own breast her six months' darling and dashed out
its brains against the wall. Its blood is upon her head, and as sure as
there is a God and a judgment, that blood will be required of her. The
crime she commits is murder, child murder--the slaughter of a speechless,
helpless being, whom it is her duty, beyond all things else, to cherish and
preserve.

12. DANGEROUS DISEASES.--We appeal to all such with earnest and with
threatening words. If they have no feeling for the fruit of their womb, if
maternal sentiment is so callous in their breasts, let them know that such
produced abortions are the constant cause of violent and dangerous womb
diseases, and frequently of early death; that they bring on mental
weakness, and often insanity; that they are the most certain means to
destroy domestic happiness which can be adopted. Better, far better, to
bear a child every year for twenty years than to resort to such a wicked
and injurious step; better to die, if need be, in the pangs of child-birth,
than to live with such a weight of sin on the conscience.

       *       *       *       *       *


{258}

The Unwelcome Child.[2]

1. TOO OFTEN THE HUSBAND thinks only of his personal gratification; he
insists upon what he calls his rights (?); forces on his wife an _unwelcome
child_, and thereby often alienates her affections, if he does not drive
her to abortion.

Dr Stockham reports the following case: "A woman once consulted me who was
the mother of five children, all born within ten years. These were puny,
scrofulous, nervous and irritable. She herself was a fit subject for
doctors and drugs. Every organ in her body seemed diseased, and every
function perverted. She was dragging out a miserable existence. Like other
physicians, I had prescribed in vain for her many maladies. One day she
chanced to inquire how she could safely prevent conception. This led me to
ask how great was the danger. She said: 'Unless my husband is absent from
home, few nights have been exempt since we were married, except it may be
three or four immediately after confinement.'

"'And yet your husband loves you?'

"'O, yes, he is kind and provides for his family. Perhaps I might love him
but for this. While now--(will God forgive me?)--_I detest, I loathe him_,
and if I knew how to support myself and children, I would leave him.'

"'Can you talk with him upon this subject?'

"'I think I can.'

"' Then there is hope, for many women cannot do that. Tell him I will give
you treatment to improve your health, and if he will wait until you can
respond, _take time for the act, have it entirely mutual from first to
last_, the demand will not come so frequent.'

"'Do you think so?'

"'The experience of many proves the truth of this statement.'

"Hopefully she went home, and in six months I had the satisfaction of
knowing my patient was restored to health, and a single coition in a month
gave the husband more satisfaction than the many had done previously, that
the creative power was under control, and that my lady could proudly say 'I
love,' where previously she said 'I hate.'

"If husbands will listen, a few simple instructions will {259} appeal to
their _common sense_, and none can imagine the gain to themselves, to their
wives and children, and their children's children. Then it may not be said
of the babes that the 'Death borders on their birth, and their cradle
stands in the grave.'"

2. WIVES! BE FRANK AND TRUE to your husbands on the subject of maternity,
and the relation that leads to it. Interchange thoughts and feelings with
them as to what nature allows or demands in regard to these. Can maternity
be natural when it is undesigned by the father or undesired by the mother?
Can a maternity be natural, healthful, ennobling to the mother, to the
child, to the father, and to the home, when no loving, tender, anxious
forethought presides over the relation in which it originated?--when the
mother's nature loathed and repelled it, and the father's only thought was
his own selfish gratification; the feelings and conditions of the mother,
and the health, character and destiny of the child that may result being
ignored by him. Wives! let there be a perfect and loving understanding
between you and your husbands on these matters, and great will be your
reward.

3. A WOMAN WRITES:--"There are few, very few, wives and mothers who could
not reveal a sad, dark picture in their own experience in their relations
to their husbands and their children. Maternity, and the relation in which
it originates, are thrust upon them by their husbands, often without regard
to their spiritual or physical conditions, and often in contempt of their
earnest and urgent entreaties. No joy comes to their heart at the
conception and birth of their children, except that which arises from the
consciousness that they have survived the sufferings wantonly and selfishly
inflicted upon them."

4. HUSBAND, WHEN MATERNITY is imposed on your wife without her consent, and
contrary to her appeal, how will her mind necessarily be affected towards
her child? It was conceived in dread and in bitterness of spirit. Every
stage of its foetal development is watched with feeling of settled
repugnance. In every step of its ante-natal progress the child meets only
with grief and indignation in the mother. She would crush out its life, if
she could. She loathed its conception; she loathed it in every stage of its
ante-natal development. Instead of fixing her mind on devising ways and
means for the healthful and happy organization and {260} development of her
child before it is born, and for its postnatal comfort and support, her
soul may be intent on its destruction, and her thoughts devise plans to
kill it. In this, how often is she aided by others! There are those, and
they are called men and women, whose profession is to devise ways to kill
children before they are born. Those who do this would not hesitate (but
for the consequences) to kill them after they are born, for the state of
mind that would justify and instigate _ante-natal_ child-murder would
justify and instigate _post-natal_ child-murder. Yet, public sentiment
consigns the murderer of post-natal children to the dungeon or the gallows,
while the murderers of ante-natal children are often allowed to pass in
society as honest and honorable men and women.

5. THE FOLLOWING IS AN EXTRACT from a letter written by one who has proudly
and nobly filled the station of a wife and mother, and whose children and
grandchildren surround her and crown her life with tenderest love and
respect:

"It has often been a matter of wonder to me that men should, so heedlessly,
and so injuriously to themselves, their wives and children, and their
homes, demand at once, as soon as they get legal possession of their wives,
the gratification of a passion, which, when indulged merely for the sake of
the gratification of the moment, must end in the destruction of all that is
beautiful, noble and divine in man or woman. I have often felt that I would
give the world for a friendship with man that should show no impurity in
its bearing, and for a conjugal relation that would, at all times, heartily
and practically recognize the right of the wife to decide for herself when
she should enter into the relation that leads to maternity."

6. TIMELY ADVICE.--Here let me say that on no subject should a man and
woman, as they are being attracted into conjugal relations, be more open
and truthful with each other than on this. No woman, who would save herself
and the man she loves from a desecrated and wretched home, should enter
into the physical relations of marriage with a man until she understands
what he expects of her as to the function of maternity, and the relation
that leads to it. If a woman is made aware that the man who would win her
as a wife regards her and the marriage relation only as the means of a
legalized gratification of his passions, and she sees fit to live with him
as a wife, with such a prospect before her, she must take the consequences
of a course so {261} degrading and so shameless. If she sees fit to make an
offering of her body and soul on the altar of her husband's sensuality, she
must do it; but she has a right to know to what base uses her womanhood is
to be put, and it is due to her, as well as to himself, that he should tell
beforehand precisely what he wants and expects of her.

Too frequently, man shrinks from all allusion, during courtship, to his
expectations in regard to future passional relations. He fears to speak of
them, lest he should shock and repel the woman he would win as a wife.
Being conscious, it may be, of an intention to use power he may acquire
over her person for his own gratification, he shuns all interchange of
views with her, lest she should divine the hidden sensualism of his soul,
and his intention to victimize her person to it the moment he shall get the
license. A woman had better die at once than enter into or continue in
marriage with a man whose highest conception of the relation is, that it is
a means of licensed animal indulgence. In such a relation, body and soul
are sacrificed.

7. ONE DISTINCTIVE CHARACTERISTIC of a true and noble husband is a feeling
of manly pride in the physical elements of his manhood. His physical
manhood, as well as his soul, is dear to the heart of his wife, because
through this he can give the fullest expression of his manly power. How can
you, my friend, secure for your person the loving care and respect of your
wife? There is but one way: so manifest yourself to her, in the hours of
your most endearing intimacies, that all your manly power shall be
associated only with all that is generous, just and noble in you, and with
purity, freedom and happiness in her. Make her feel that all which
constitutes you a man, and qualifies you to be her husband and the father
of her children, belongs to her, and is sacredly consecrated to the
perfection and happiness of her nature. Do this, and the happiness of your
home is made complete. Your _body_ will be lovingly and reverently cared
for, because the wife of your bosom feels that it is the sacred symbol
through which a noble, manly love is ever speaking to her, to cheer and
sustain her.

8. WOMAN IS EVER PROUD, and justly so, of the manly passion of her husband,
when she knows it is controlled by a love for her, whose manifestations
have regard only to her elevation and happiness. The power which, when bent
only on selfish indulgence, becomes a source of more shame, degradation,
disease and wretchedness, to {262} women and to children than all other
things put together, does but ennoble her, add grace and glory to her
being, and concentrate and vitalize the love that encircles her as a wife
when it is controlled by wisdom and consecrated to her highest growth and
happiness, and that of her children. It lends enchantment to her person,
and gives a fascination to her smiles, her words and her caresses, which
ever breathe of purity and of heaven, and make her all lovely as a wife and
mother to her husband and the father of her child. _Manly passion is to the
conjugal love of the wife like the sun to the rose-bud, that opens its
petals, and causes them to give out their sweetest fragrance and to display
their most delicate tints; or like the frost, which chills and kills it ere
it blossoms in its richness and beauty._

9. A DIADEM OF BEAUTY.--Maternity, when it exists at the call of the wife,
and is gratefully received, but binds her heart more tenderly and devotedly
to her husband. As the father of her child, he stands before her invested
with new beauty and dignity. In receiving from him the germ of a new life,
she receives that which she feels is to add new beauty and glory to her as
a woman--a new grace and attraction to her as a wife. She loves and honors
him, because he has crowned her with the glory of a mother. Maternity, to
her, instead of being repulsive, is a diadem of beauty, a crown of
rejoicing; and deep, tender, and self-forgetting are her love and reverence
for him who has placed it on her brow. How noble, how august, how beautiful
is maternity when thus bestowed and received!

10. CONCLUSION.--Would you, then, secure the love and trust of your wife,
and become an object of her ever-growing tenderness and reverence? Assure
her, by all your manifestations, and your perfect respect for the functions
of her nature, that your passion shall be in subjection of her wishes. It
is not enough that you have secured in her heart respect for your spiritual
and intellectual manhood. To maintain your self-respect in your relations
with her, to perfect your growth and happiness as a husband, you must cause
your _physical_ nature to be tenderly cherished and reverenced by her in
all the sacred intimacies of home. No matter how much she reverences your
intellectual or your social power, if by reason of your uncalled-for
passional manifestations you have made your physical manhood disagreeable,
how can you, in her presence, preserve a sense of manly pride and dignity
as a husband?

       *       *       *       *       *


{263}

Heredity and the Transmission of Diseases.

[Illustration: HEALTH AND DISEASE.]

1. BAD HABITS.--It is known that the girl who marries the man with bad
habits, is, in a measure, responsible for the evil tendencies which these
habits have created in the children; and young people are constantly warned
of the danger in marrying when they know they come from families troubled
with chronic diseases or insanity. To be sure the warnings have had little
effect thus far in preventing such marriages, and it is doubtful whether
they will, unless the prophecy of an extremist writing for one of our
periodicals comes to pass--that the time is not far distant when such
marriages will be a crime punishable by law. {264}

2. TENDENCY IN THE RIGHT DIRECTION.--That there is a tendency in the right
direction must be admitted, and is perhaps most clearly shown in some of
the articles on prison reform. Many of them strongly urge the necessity of
preventive work as the truest economy, and some go so far as to say that if
the present human knowledge of the laws of heredity were acted upon for a
generation, reformatory measures would be rendered unnecessary.

3. SERIOUS CONSEQUENCES.--The mother who has ruined her health by late
hours, highly-spiced food, and general carelessness in regard to hygienic
laws, and the father who is the slave of questionable habits, will be very
sure to have children either mentally or morally inferior to what they
might otherwise have had a right to expect. But the prenatal influences may
be such that evils arising from such may be modified to a great degree.

4. FORMATION OF CHARACTER.--I believe that pre-natal influences may do as
much in the formation of character as all the education that can come
after, and that the mother may, in a measure, "will" what that influence
shall be, and that, as knowledge on the subject increases, it will be more
and more under their control. In that, as in everything else, things that
would be possible with one mother would not be with another, and measures
that would be successful with one would produce opposite results from the
other.

5. INHERITING DISEASE. Consumption--that dread foe of modern life--is the
most frequently encountered of all affections as the result of inherited
predispositions. Indeed, some of the most eminent physicians have believed
it is never produced in any other way. Heart disease, disease of the
throat, excessive obesity, affections of the skin, asthma, disorders of the
brain and nervous system, gout, rheumatism and cancer, are all hereditary.
A tendency to bleed frequently, profusely and uncontrollably, from trifling
wounds, is often met with as a family affection.

6. MENTAL DERANGEMENTS.--Almost all forms of mental derangements are
hereditary--one of the parents or near relation being afflicted. Physical
or bodily weakness is often hereditary, such as scrofula, gout, rheumatism,
rickets, consumption, apoplexy, hernia, urinary calculi, hemorrhoids or
piles, cataract, etc. In fact, all physical weakness, if ingrafted in
either parent, is transmitted from parents to offspring, and is often more
strongly marked in the latter than in the former.

7. MARKS AND DEFORMITIES.--Marks and deformities are all transmissible from
parents to offspring, equally with {265} diseases and peculiar
proclivities. Among such blemishes may be mentioned moles, hair-lips,
deficient or supernumerary fingers, toes, and other characteristics. It is
also asserted that dogs and cats that have accidentally lost their tails,
bring forth young similarly deformed. Blumenbach tells of a man who had
lost his little finger, having children with the same deformity.

8. CAUTION.--Taking facts like these into consideration, how very important
is it for persons, before selecting partners for life, to deliberately
weigh every element and circumstances of this nature, if they would insure
a felicitous union, and not entail upon their posterity disease, misery and
despair. Alas! in too many instances matrimony is made a matter of money,
while all earthly joys are sacrificed upon the accursed altars of lust and
mammon.

[Illustration]

{266}

Preparation for Maternity.

1. WOMAN BEFORE MARRIAGE.--It is not too much to say that the life of women
before marriage ought to be adjusted with more reference to their duties as
mothers than to any other one earthly object. It is the continuance of the
race which is the chief purpose of marriage. The passion of amativeness is
probably, on the whole, the most powerful of all human impulses. Its
purpose, however, is rather to subserve the object of continuing the
species, than merely its own gratification.

2. EXERCISE.--Girls should be brought up to live much in the open air,
always with abundant clothing against wet and cold. They should be
encouraged to take much active exercise; as much, if they want to, as boys.
It is as good for little girls to run and jump, to ramble in the woods, to
go boating, to ride and drive, to play and "have fun" generally, as for
little boys.

3. PRESERVE THE SIGHT.--Children should be carefully prevented from using
their eyes to read or write, or in any equivalent exertion, either before
breakfast, by dim daylight, or by artificial light. Even school studies
should be such that they can be dealt with by daylight. Lessons that cannot
be learned without lamp-light study are almost certainly excessive. This
precaution should ordinarily be maintained until the age of puberty is
reached.

4. BATHING.--Bathing should be enforced according to constitutions, not by
an invariable rule, except the invariable rule of keeping clean. Not
necessarily every day, nor necessarily in cold water; though those
conditions are doubtless often right in case of abundant physical health
and strength.

5. WRONG HABITS.--The habit of daily natural evacuations should be
solicitously formed and maintained. Words or figures could never express
the discomforts and wretchedness which wrong habits in this particular have
locked down upon innumerable women for years and even for life.

6. DRESS.--Dress should be warm, loose, comely, and modest rather than
showy; but it should be good enough to satisfy a child's desires after a
good appearance, if they are reasonable. Children, indeed, should have all
their reasonable desires granted as far as possible; for nothing makes them
reasonable so rapidly and so surely as to treat them reasonably.

{267}

7. TIGHT LACING.--Great harm is often done to maidens for want of knowledge
in them, or wisdom and care in their parents. The extremes of fashions are
very prone to violate not only taste, but physiology. Such cases are tight
lacing, low necked dresses, thin shoes, heavy skirts. And yet, if the
ladies only knew, the most attractive costumes are not the extremes of
fashion, but those which conform to fashion enough to avoid oddity, which
preserve decorum and healthfulness, whether or no; and here is the great
secret of successful dress--vary fashion so as to suit the style of the
individual.

8. COURTSHIP AND MARRIAGE.--Last of all, parental care in the use of
whatever influence can be exerted in the matter of courtship and marriage.
Maidens, as well as youths, must, after all, choose for themselves. It is
their own lives which they take in their hands as they enter the marriage
state, and not their parents'; and as the consequences affect them
primarily it is the plainest justice that with the responsibility should be
joined the right of choice. The parental influence, then, must be indirect
and advisory. Indirect, through the whole bringing up of their daughter;
for if they have trained her aright, she will be incapable of enduring a
fool, still more a knave.

9. A YOUNG WOMAN AND A YOUNG MAN HAD BETTER NOT BE ALONE TOGETHER VERY MUCH
UNTIL THEY ARE MARRIED.--This will be found to prevent a good many
troubles. It is not meant to imply that either sex, or any member of it, is
worse than another, or bad at all, or anything but human. It is simply the
prescription of a safe general rule. It is no more an imputation than the
rule that people had better not be left without oversight in presence of
large sums of other folks' money. The close personal proximity of the sexes
is greatly undesirable before marriage. Kisses and caresses are most
properly the monopoly of wives. Such indulgences have a direct and powerful
physiological effect. Nay, they often lead to the most fatal results.

10. IGNORANCE BEFORE MARRIAGE.--At some time before marriage those who are
to enter into it ought to be made acquainted with some of the plainest
common-sense limitations which should govern their new relations to each
other. Ignorance in such matters has caused an infinite amount of disgust,
pain, and unhappiness. It is not necessary to specify particulars here: see
other portions of this work.

       *       *       *       *       *


{269}

Impregnation.

[Illustration: A HEALTHY MOTHER.]

1. CONCEPTION OR IMPREGNATION.--Conception or impregnation takes place by
the union of the male sperm and female sperm. Whether this is accomplished
in the ovaries, the oviducts or the uterus, is still a question of
discussion and investigation by physiologists.

2. PASSING OFF THE OVUM.--"With many woman," says Dr. Stockham in her
Tokology, "the ovum passes off within twenty-four or forty-eight hours
after menstruation begins. Some, by careful observation, are able to know
with certainty when this takes place. It is often accompanied with malaise,
nervousness, headache or actual uterine pain. A minute substance like the
white of an egg; with a fleck of blood in it, can frequently be seen upon
the clothing. Ladies who have noticed this phenomenon testify to its
recurring very regularly upon the same day after menstruation. Some
delicate women have observed it as late as the fourteenth day."

3. CALCULATIONS.--Conception is more liable to take place either
immediately before or immediately after the period, and, on that account it
is usual when calculating the date at which to expect labor, to count from
the day of disappearance of the last period. The easiest way to make a
calculation is to count back three months from the date of the last period
and add seven days; thus we might say that the date was the 18th of July;
counting back brings us to the 18th of April, and adding the seven days
will bring us to the 25th day of April, the expected time.

4. EVIDENCE OF CONCEPTION.--Very many medical authorities, distinguished in
this line, have stated their belief that women never pass more than two or
three days at the most beyond the forty weeks conceded to pregnancy--that
is two hundred and eighty days or ten lunar months, or nine calendar months
and a week. About two hundred and eighty days will represent the average
duration of pregnancy, counting from the last day of the last period. Now
it must be borne in mind, that there are many disturbing elements which
might cause the young married woman to miss a time. During the first month
of pregnancy there is no sign by which the condition may be positively
known. The missing of a period, especially in a person who has been regular
for some time, may lead one to suspect it; but there are many attendant
causes in married life, the little annoyances of household duties,
embarrassments, and the enforced gayety which naturally surrounds the
bride, and {270} these should all be taken into consideration in the
discussion as to whether or not she is pregnant. But then, again, there are
some rare cases who have menstruated throughout their pregnancy; and also
cases where menstruation was never established and pregnancy occurred.
Nevertheless, the non-appearance of the period, with other signs, may be
taken as presumptive evidence.

5. "ARTIFICIAL IMPREGNATION.--It may not be generally known that union is
not essential to impregnation; it is possible for conception to occur
without congress. All that is necessary is that seminal animalcules enter
the womb and unite there with the egg or ovum. It is not essential that the
semen be introduced through the medium of the male organ, as it has been
demonstrated repeatedly that by means of a syringe and freshly obtained and
healthy semen, impregnation can be made to follow by its careful
introduction. There are physicians in France who make a specialty of
"Artificial Impregnation," as it is called, and produce children to
otherwise childless couples, being successful in many instances in
supplying them as they are desired."

       *       *       *       *       *


Signs and Symptoms of Pregnancy.

1. THE FIRST SIGN.--The first sign that leads a lady to suspect that she is
pregnant is her ceasing-to-be-unwell. This, provided she has just before
been in good health, is a strong symptom of pregnancy; but still there must
be others to corroborate it.

2. ABNORMAL CONDITION.--Occasionally, women menstruate during the entire
time of gestation. This, without doubt, is an abnormal condition, and
should be remedied, as disastrous consequences may result. Also, women have
been known to bear children who have never menstruated. The cases are rare
of pregnancy taking place where menstruation has never occurred, yet it
frequently happens that women never menstruate from one pregnancy to
another. In these cases this symptom is ruled out for diagnotic purposes.

3. MAY PROCEED FROM OTHER CAUSES.--But a ceasing-to-be-unwell may proceed
from other causes than that of pregnancy, such as disease or disorder of
the womb or of other {271} organs of the body--especially of the lungs--it
is not by itself alone entirely to be depended upon; although, as a single
sign, it is, especially if the patient be healthy, one of the most reliable
of all the other signs of pregnancy.

4. MORNING SICKNESS.--If this does not arise from a disordered stomach, it
is a trustworthy sign of pregnancy. A lady who has once had
morning-sickness can always for the future distinguish it from each and
from every other sickness; it is a peculiar sickness, which no other
sickness can simulate. Moreover, it is emphatically a morning-sickness--the
patient being, as a rule, for the rest of the day entirely free from
sickness or from the feeling of sickness.

[Illustration: Embryo of Twenty Days, Laid Open.

_b_, the Back: _a_ _a_ _a_, Covering, and pinned to Back.]

5. A THIRD SYMPTOM.--A third symptom is shooting, throbbing and lancinating
pains in, and enlargement of the breasts, with soreness of the nipples,
occurring about the second month. In some instances, after the first few
months, a small quantity of watery fluid or a little milk, may be squeezed
out of them. This latter symptom, in a first pregnancy, is valuable, and
can generally be relied on as fairly conclusive of pregnancy. Milk in the
breast, however small it may be in quantity, especially in a first
pregnancy, is a reliable sign, indeed, we might say, a certain sign, of
pregnancy.

6. A DARK BROWN AREOLA OR MARK around the nipple is one of the
distinguishing signs of pregnancy--more especially of a first pregnancy.
Women who have had large families, seldom, even when they are not pregnant,
lose this mark entirely; but when they are pregnant it is more intensely
dark--the darkest brown--especially if they be brunettes.

7. QUICKENING.--Quickening is one of the most important signs of pregnancy,
and one of the most valuable, as at the moment it occurs, as a rule, the
motion of the child is first felt, whilst, at the same time, there is a
sudden increase in the size of the abdomen. Quickening is a proof that
nearly half the time of pregnancy has passed. If there be a {272} liability
to miscarry, quickening makes matters more safe, as there is less
likelihood of a miscarriage after than before it. A lady at this time
frequently feels faint or actually faints away; she is often giddy, or
sick, or nervous, and in some instances even hysterically; although, in
rare cases, some women do not even know the precise time when they quicken.

8. INCREASED SIZE AND HARDNESS OF THE ABDOMEN.--This is very characteristic
of pregnancy. When a lady is not pregnant the abdomen is soft and flaccid;
when she is pregnant, and after she has quickened, the abdomen; over the
region of the womb, is hard and resisting.

[Illustration: Embryo at Thirty Days. _a_, the Head; _b_, the Eyes; _d_,
the Neck; _e_, the Chest; _f_, the Abdomen.]

9. EXCITABILITY OF MIND.--Excitability of mind is very common in pregnancy,
more especially if the patient be delicate; indeed, excitability is a sign
of debility, and requires plenty of good nourishment, but few stimulants.

10. ERUPTIONS ON THE SKIN.--Principally on the face, neck, or throat, are
tell-tales of pregnancy, and to an experienced matron, publish the fact
that an acquaintance thus marked is pregnant.

{273}

11. THE FOETAL HEART.--In the fifth month there is a sign which, if
detected, furnishes indubitable evidence of conception, and that is the
sound of the child's heart. If the ear be placed on the abdomen, over the
womb, the beating of the foetal heart can sometimes be heard quite plainly,
and by the use of an instrument called the stethoscope, the sounds can be
still more plainly heard. This is a very valuable sign, inasmuch as the
presence of the child is not only ascertained, but also its position, and
whether there are twins or more.

[Illustration: OUR KING.]

{274}

[Illustration]

Diseases of Pregnancy.

1. COSTIVE STATE OF THE BOWELS.--A costive state of the bowels is common in
pregnancy; a mild laxative is therefore occasionally necessary. The mildest
must be selected, as a strong purgative is highly improper, and even
dangerous. Calomel and all other preparations of mercury are to be
especially avoided, as a mercurial medicine is apt to weaken the system,
and sometimes even to produce a miscarriage. Let me again urge the
importance of a lady, during the whole period of pregnancy, being
particular as to the state of her bowels, as costiveness is a fruitful
cause of painful, tedious and hard labors.

2. LAXATIVES.--The best laxatives are castor oil, salad oil, compound
rhubarb pills, honey, stewed prunes, stewed rhubarb, Muscatel raisins,
figs, grapes, roasted apples, baked pears, stewed Normandy pippins, coffee,
brown-bread and treacle. Scotch oatmeal made with new milk or water, or
with equal parts of milk and water.

3. PILLS.--When the motions are hard, and when the bowels are easily acted
upon, two, or three, or four pills made of Castile soap will frequently
answer the purpose; and if they will, are far better than any other
ordinary laxative. The following is a good form. Take of:

  Castile Soap, five scruples;
  Oil of Caraway, six drops;

To make twenty-four pills. Two, or three, or four to be taken at bedtime,
occasionally.

4. HONEY.--A teaspoonful of honey, either eaten at breakfast or dissolved
in a cup of tea, will frequently, comfortably and effectually, open the
bowels, and will supersede the necessity of taking laxative medicine.

5. NATURE'S MEDICINES.--Now, Nature's medicines--exercise in the open air,
occupation, and household duties--on the contrary, not only at the time
open the bowels, but keep up a proper action for the future; hence their
inestimable superiority. {275}

6. WARM WATER INJECTIONS.--An excellent remedy for costiveness of pregnancy
is an enema, either of warm water, or of Castile soap and water, which the
patient, by means of a self-injecting enema-apparatus, may administer to
herself. The quantity of warm water to be used, is from half a pint to a
pint; the proper heat is the temperature of new milk; the time for
administering it is early in the morning, twice or three times a week.

7. MUSCULAR PAINS OF THE ABDOMEN.--The best remedy is an abdominal belt
constructed for pregnancy, and adjusted with proper straps and buckles to
accomodate the gradually increasing size of the womb. This plan often
affords great comfort and relief; indeed, such a belt is indispensably
necessary.

8. DIARRHOEA.--Although the bowels in pregnancy are generally costive, they
are sometimes in an opposite state, and are relaxed. Now, this relaxation
is frequently owing to there having been prolonged constipation, and Nature
is trying to relieve herself by purging. Do not check it, but allow it to
have its course, and take a little rhubarb or magnesia. The diet should be
simple, plain, and nourishing, and should consist of beef tea, chicken
broth, arrowroot, and of well-made and well-boiled oatmeal gruel. Butcher's
meat, for a few days, should not be eaten; and stimulants of all kinds must
be avoided.

9. FIDGETS.--A pregnant lady sometimes suffers severely from "fidgets"; it
generally affects her feet and legs, especially at night, so as to entirely
destroy her sleep; she cannot lie still; she every few minutes moves,
tosses and tumbles about--first on one side, then on the other. The causes
of "fidgets" are a heated state of the blood; an irritable condition of the
nervous system, prevailing at that particular time; and want of occupation.
The treatment of "fidgets" consists of: sleeping in a well-ventilated
apartment, with either window or door open; a thorough ablution of the
whole body every morning, and a good washing with tepid water of the face,
neck, chest, arms and hands every night; shunning hot and close rooms;
taking plenty of out-door exercise; living on a bland, nourishing, but not
rich diet; avoiding meat at night, and substituting in lieu thereof, either
a cupful of arrow-root made with milk, or of well-boiled oatmeal gruel.

10. EXERCISE.--If a lady, during the night, have the "fidgets," she should
get out of bed; take a short walk up and down the room, being well
protected by a dressing-gown; empty her bladder; turn her pillow, so as to
have {276} the cold side next the head; and then lie down again; and the
chances are that she will now fall asleep. If during the day she have the
"fidgets," a ride in an open carriage; or a stroll in the garden, or in the
fields; or a little housewifery, will do her good, and there is nothing
like fresh air, exercise, and occupation to drive away "the fidgets."

11. HEARTBURN.--Heartburn is a common and often a distressing symptom of
pregnancy. The acid producing the heartburn is frequently much increased by
an overloaded stomach. An abstemious diet ought to be strictly observed.
Great attention should be paid to the quality of the food. Greens, pastry,
hot buttered toast, melted butter, and everything that is rich and gross,
ought to be carefully avoided. Either a teaspoonful of heavy calcined
magnesia, or half a teaspoonful of carbonate of soda--the former to be
preferred if there be constipation--should occasionally be taken in a
wine-glassful of warm water. If these do not relieve--the above directions
as to diet having been strictly attended to--the following mixture ought to
be tried. Take of:

  Carbonate of Ammonia, half a drachm;
  Bicarbonate of Soda, a drachm and a half;
  Water, eight ounces;

To make a mixture: Two tablespoonfuls to be taken twice or three times a
day, until relief be obtained.

12. WIND IN THE STOMACH AND BOWELS.--This is a frequent reason why a
pregnant lady cannot sleep at night. The two most frequent causes of
flatulence are, first, the want of walking exercise during the day, and
second, the eating of a hearty meal just before going to bed at night. The
remedies are, of course, in each instance, self-evident.

13. SWOLLEN LEGS FROM ENLARGED VEINS (VARICOSE VEINS.)--The veins are
frequently much enlarged and distended, causing the legs to be greatly
swollen and very painful, preventing the patient from taking proper walking
exercise. Swollen legs are owing to the pressure of the womb upon the
blood-vessels above. Women who have had large families are more liable than
others to varicose veins. If a lady marry late in life, or if she be very
heavy in pregnancy--carrying the child low down--she is more likely to have
distention of the veins. The best plan will be for her to wear during the
day an elastic stocking, which ought to be made on purpose for her, in
order that it may properly fit the leg and foot.

14. STRETCHING OF THE SKIN OF THE ABDOMEN.--This is frequently, in a first
pregnancy, distressing, from the {277} soreness it causes. The best remedy
is to rub the abdomen, every night and morning, with warm camphorated oil,
and to wear a belt during the day and a broad flannel bandage at night,
both of which should be put on moderately but comfortably tight. The belt
must be secured in its situation by means of properly adjusted straps.

15. BEFORE THE APPROACH OF LABOR.--The patient, before the approach of
labor, ought to take particular care to have the bowels gently opened, as
during that state a costive state greatly increases her sufferings, and
lengthens the period of her labor. A gentle action is all that is
necessary; a violent one would do more harm than good.

16. SWOLLEN AND PAINFUL BREASTS.--The breasts are, at times, during
pregnancy, much swollen and very painful and, now and then, they cause the
patient great uneasiness as she fancies that she is going to have either
some dreadful tumor or a gathering of the bosom. There need, in such a
case, be no apprehension. The swelling and the pain are the consequences of
the pregnancy, and will in due time subside without any unpleasant result.
For treatment she cannot do better than rub them well, every night and
morning, with equal parts of Eau de Cologne and olive oil, and wear a piece
of new flannel over them; taking care to cover the nipples with soft linen,
as the friction of the flannel might irritate them.

17. BOWEL COMPLAINTS.--Bowel complaints, during pregnancy, are not
unfrequent. A dose either of rhubarb and magnesia, or of castor oil, are
the best remedies, and are generally, in the way of medicine, all that is
necessary.

17. CRAMPS.--Cramps of the legs and of the thighs during the latter period,
and especially at night, are apt to attend pregnancy, and are caused by the
womb pressing upon the nerves which extend to the lower extremities.
Treatment.--Tightly tie a handkerchief, folded like a neckerchief, round
the limb a little above the part affected, and let it remain on for a few
minutes. Friction by means of the hand either with opodeldoc or with
laudanum, taking care not to drink the lotion by mistake, will also give
relief.

[Illustration: A PRECIOUS FLOWER.]

19. THE WHITES.--The whites during pregnancy, especially during the latter
months, and particularly if the lady have had many children, are frequently
troublesome, and are, in a measure, occasioned by the pressure of the womb
on the parts below, causing irritation. The best way, therefore, to obviate
such pressure is for the patient to lie down a great part of each day
either on a bed or a sofa. She ought to retire early to rest; she should
sleep on a hard {279} mattress and in a well-ventilated apartment, and
should not overload her bed with clothes. A thick, heavy quilt at these
times, and indeed at all times, is particularly objectionable; the
perspiration cannot pass readily through it as through blankets, and thus
she is weakened. She ought to live on plain, wholesome, nourishing food;
and she must abstain from beer and wine and spirits. The bowels ought to be
gently opened by means of a Seidlitz powder, which should occasionally be
taken early in the morning.

20. IRRITATION AND ITCHING OF THE EXTERNAL PARTS.--This a most troublesome
affection, and may occur at any time, but more especially during the latter
period of the pregnancy. Let her diet be simple and nourishing; let her
avoid stimulants of all kinds. Let her take a sitz-bath of warm water,
considerably salted. Let her sit in the bath with the body thoroughly
covered.

21. HOT AND INFLAMED.--The external parts, and the passage to the womb
(vagina), in these cases, are not only irritable and itching, but are
sometimes hot and inflamed, and are covered either with small pimples, or
with a whitish exudation of the nature of aphtha (thrush), somewhat similar
to the thrush on the mouth of an infant; then, the addition of glycerine to
the lotion is a great improvement and usually gives much relief.

22. [3]BILIOUSNESS is defined by some one as piggishness. Generally it may
be regarded as _overfed_. The elements of the bile are in the blood in
excess of the power of the liver to eliminate them. This may be caused
either from the superabundance of the materials from which the bile is made
or by inaction of the organ itself. Being thus retained the system is
_clogged_. It is the result of either too much food in quantity or too rich
in quality. Especially is it caused by the excessive use of _fats and
sweets_. The simplest remedy is the best. A plain, light diet with plenty
of acid fruits, avoiding fats and sweets, will ameliorate or remove it.
Don't force the appetite. Let hunger demand food. In the morning the
sensitiveness of the stomach may be relieved by taking before rising a cup
of hot water, hot milk, hot lemonade, rice or barley water, selecting
according to preference. For this purpose many find coffee made from
browned wheat or corn the best drink. Depend for a time upon liquid food
that can be taken up by absorbents. The juice of lemons and other acid
fruits is usually grateful, and {280} assists in assimilating any excess in
nutriment. These may be diluted according to taste. With many, an egg
lemonade proves relishing and acceptable.

23. DERANGED APPETITE.--Where the appetite fails, let the patient go
without eating for a little while, say for two or three meals. If, however,
the strength begins to go, try the offering of some unexpected delicacy; or
give small quantities of nourishing food, as directed in case of morning
sickness.

24. PILES.--For cases of significance consult a physician. As with
constipation, so with piles, its frequent result, fruit diet, exercise, and
sitz-bath regimen will do much to prevent the trouble. Frequent local
applications of a cold compress, and even of ice, and tepid water
injections, are of great service. Walking or standing aggravate this
complaint. Lying down alleviates it. Dr. Shaw says, "There is nothing in
the world that will produce so great relief in piles as fasting. If the fit
is severe, live a whole day, or even two, if necessary, upon pure soft cold
water alone. Give then very lightly of vegetable food."

25. TOOTHACHE.--There is a sort of proverb that a woman loses one tooth
every time she has a child. Neuralgic toothache during pregnancy is, at any
rate, extremely common, and often has to be endured. It is generally
thought not best to have teeth extracted during pregnancy, as the shock to
the nervous system has sometimes caused miscarriage. To wash out the mouth
morning and night with cold or lukewarm water and salt is often of use. If
the teeth are decayed, consult a good dentist in the early stages of
pregnancy, and have the offending teeth properly dressed. Good dentists, in
the present state of the science, extract very few teeth, but save them.

26. SALIVATION.--Excessive secretion of the saliva has usually been
reckoned substantially incurable. Fasting, cold water treatment, exercise
and fruit diet may be relied on to prevent, cure or alleviate it, where
this is possible, as it frequently is.

27. HEADACHE.--This is, perhaps, almost as common in cases of pregnancy as
"morning sickness." It may be from determination of blood to the head, from
constipation or indigestion, constitutional "sick headache," from
neuralgia, from a cold, from rheumatism. Correct living will prevent much
headache trouble; and where this does not answer the purpose, rubbing and
making magnetic passes over the {281} head by the hand of some healthy
magnetic person will often prove of great service.

28. LIVER-SPOTS.--These, on the face, must probably be endured, as no
trustworthy way of driving them off is known.

29. JAUNDICE.--See the doctor.

30. PAIN ON THE RIGHT SIDE.--This is liable to occur from about the fifth
to the eighth month, and is attributed to the pressure of the enlarging
womb upon the liver. Proper living is most likely to alleviate it. Wearing
a wet girdle in daytime or a wet compress at night, sitz-baths, and
friction with the wet hand may also be tried. If the pain is severe a
mustard poultice may be used. Exercise should be carefully moderated if
found to increase the pain. If there is fever and inflammation with it,
consult a physician. It is usually not dangerous, but uncomfortable only.

31. PALPITATION OF THE HEART.--To be prevented by healthy living and calm,
good humor. Lying down will often gradually relieve it, so will a compress
wet with water, as hot as can be borne, placed over the heart and renewed
as often as it gets cool.

32. FAINTING.--Most likely to be caused by "quickening," or else by tight
dress, bad air, over-exertion, or other unhealthy living. It is not often
dangerous. Lay the patient in an easy posture, the head rather low than
high, and where cool air may blow across the face; loosen the dress if
tight; sprinkle cold water on the face and hands.

33. SLEEPLESSNESS.--Most likely to be caused by incorrect living, and to be
prevented and cured by the opposite. A glass or two of cold water drank
deliberately on going to bed often helps one to go to sleep; so does
bathing the face and hands and the feet in cold water. A short nap in the
latter part of the forenoon can sometimes be had, and is of use. Such a nap
ought not to be too long, or it leaves a heavy feeling; it should be sought
with the mind in a calm state, in a well-ventilated though darkened room,
and with the clothing removed, as at night. A similar nap in the afternoon
is not so good, but is better than nothing. The tepid sitz-bath on going to
bed will often produce sleep, and so will gentle percussion given by an
attendant with palms of the hand over the back for a few minutes on
retiring. To secure sound sleep do not read, write or severely tax the mind
in the evening. {282}

[Illustration]

MORNING SICKNESS.

1. A pregnant woman is especially liable to suffer many forms of dyspepsia,
nervous troubles, sleeplessness, etc.

2. MORNING SICKNESS is the most common and is the result of an irritation
in the womb, caused by some derangement, and it is greatly irritated by the
habit of indulging in sexual gratification during pregnancy. If people
would imitate the lower animals and reserve the vital forces of the mother
for the benefit of her unborn child, it would be a great boon to humanity.
Morning sickness may begin the next day after conception, but it usually
appears from two to three weeks after the beginning of pregnancy and
continues with more or less severity from two to four months.

3. HOME TREATMENT FOR MORNING SICKNESS.--Avoid all highly seasoned and rich
food. Also avoid strong tea and coffee. Eat especially light and simple
suppers at five o'clock and no later than six. Some simple broths, such as
will be found in the cooking department of this book will be very
nourishing and soothing. Coffee made from brown wheat or corn is an
excellent remedy to use. The juice of lemons reduced with water will
sometimes prove very effectual. A good lemonade with an egg well stirred is
very nourishing and toning to the stomach.

4. HOT FOMENTATION on the stomach and liver is excellent, and warm and hot
water injections are highly beneficial.

5. A little powdered magnesia at bed time, taken in a little milk, will
often give almost permanent relief.

6. Avoid corsets or any other pressure upon the stomach. All garments must
be worn loosely. In many cases this will entirely prevent all stomach
disturbances.

       *       *       *       *       *


{283}

Relation of Husband and Wife During Pregnancy.

1. MISCARRIAGE.--If the wife is subject to miscarriage every precaution
should be employed to prevent its happening again. Under such exceptional
circumstances the husband should sleep apart the first five months of
pregnancy; after that length of time, the ordinary relation may be assumed.
If miscarriage has taken place, intercourse should be avoided for a month
or six weeks at least after the accident.

2. IMPREGNATION--Impregnation is the only mission of intercourse, and after
that has taken place, intercourse can subserve no other purpose than
sensual gratification.

3. WOMAN MUST JUDGE.--Every man should recognize the fact that woman is the
sole umpire as to when, how frequent, and under what circumstances,
connection should take place. Her desires should not be ignored, for her
likes and dislikes are--as seen in another part of this book--easily
impressed upon the unborn child. If she is strong and healthy there is no
reason why passion should not be gratified with moderation and caution
during the whole period of pregnancy, but she must be the sole judge and
her desires supreme.

4. VOLUNTARY INSTANCES.--No voluntary instances occur through the entire
animal kingdom. All females repel with force and fierceness the approaches
of the male. The human family is the only exception. A man that loves his
wife, however, will respect her under all circumstances and recognize her
condition and yield to her wishes.

[Illustration]

{284}

A Private Word to the Expectant Mother

[Illustration]

Elizabeth Cady Stanton, in a lecture to ladies, thus strongly states her
views regarding maternity and painless childbirth:

"We must educate our daughters to think that motherhood is grand, and that
God never cursed it. And this curse, if it be a curse, may be rolled off,
as man has rolled away the curse of labor; as the curse has been rolled
from the descendants of Ham. My mission is to preach this new gospel. If
you suffer, it is not because you are cursed of God, but because you
violate His laws. What an incubus it would take from woman could she be
educated to know that the pains of maternity are no curse upon her kind. We
know that among the Indians the squaws do not suffer in childbirth. They
will step aside from the ranks, even on the march, and return in a short
time to them with the newborn child. What an absurdity then, to suppose
that only enlightened Christian women are cursed. But one word of fact is
worth a volume of philosophy; let me give you some of my own experience. I
am the mother of seven children. My girlhood was spent mostly in the open
air. I early imbibed the idea that a girl was just as good as a boy, and I
carried it out. I would walk five miles before breakfast or {285} ride ten
on horseback. After I was married I wore my clothing sensibly. Their weight
hung entirely on my shoulders. I never compressed my body out of its
natural shape. When my first four children were born, I suffered very
little. I then made up my mind that it was totally unnecessary for me to
suffer at all; so I dressed lightly, walked every day, lived as much as
possible in the open air, ate no condiments or spices, kept quiet, listened
to music, looked at pictures, and took proper care of myself. The night
before the birth of the child I walked three miles. The child was born
without a particle of pain. I bathed it and dressed it, and it weighed ten
and one-half pounds. That same day I dined with the family. Everybody said
I would surely die, but I never had a relapse or a moment's inconvenience
from it. I know this is not being delicate and refined, but if you would be
vigorous and healthy, in spite of the diseases of your ancestors, and your
own disregard of nature's laws, try it."

       *       *       *       *       *


Shall Pregnant Women Work?

1. OVER-WORKED MOTHERS.--Children born of over-worked mothers, are liable
to be a dwarfed and puny race. However, their chances are better than those
of the children of inactive, dependent, indolent mothers who have neither
brain nor muscle to transmit to son or daughter. The truth seems to be that
excessive labor, with either body or mind, is alike injurious to both men
and women, and herein lies the sting of that old curse. This paragraph
suggests all that need be said on the question whether pregnant women
should or should not labor.

2. FOOLISHLY IDLE.--At least it is certain that they should not be
foolishly idle; and on the other hand, it is equally certain that they
should be relieved from painful laborious occupations that exhaust and
unfit them for happiness. Pleasant and useful physical and intellectual
occupation, however, will not only do no harm, but positive good.

3. THE BEST MAN AND THE BEST WOMAN.--The best man is he who can rear the
best child, and the best woman is she who can rear the best child. We very
properly extol to the skies Harriet Hosmer, the artist, for cutting in
marble the statue of a Zenobia, how much more should we sing praises to the
man and the woman who bring into the world a noble boy or girl. The one is
a piece of lifeless beauty, the other a piece of life including all beauty,
all possibilities.

       *       *       *       *       *


{286}

Words for Young Mothers.

[Illustration]

The act of nursing is sometimes painful to the mother, especially before
the habit is fully established. The discomfort is greatly increased if the
skin that covers the nipples is tender and delicate. The suction pulls it
off, leaving them in a state in which the necessary pressure of the child's
lips cause intense agony. This can be prevented in a great measure, says
Elizabeth Robinson Scovil, in _Ladies' Home Journal_, if not entirely, by
bathing the nipples twice a day for six weeks before the confinement with
powdered alum dissolved in alcohol; or salt dissolved in brandy. If there
is any symptom of the skin cracking when the child begins to nurse, they
should be painted with a mixture of tannin and glycerine. This must be
washed off before the baby touches them and renewed when it leaves them. If
they are {287} very painful, the doctor will probably order morphia added
to the mixture. A rubber nipple shield to be put on at the time of nursing,
is a great relief. If the nipples are retracted or drawn inward, they can
be drawn out painlessly by filling a pint bottle with boiling water,
emptying it and quickly applying the mouth over the nipple. As the air in
the bottle cools, it condenses, leaving a vacuum and the nipple is pushed
out by the air behind it.

When the milk accumulates or "cakes" in the breast in hard patches, they
should be rubbed very gently, from the base upwards, with warm camphorated
oil. The rubbing should be the lightest, most delicate stroking, avoiding
pressure. If lumps appear at the base of the breast and it is red, swollen
and painful, cloths wrung out of cold water should be applied and the
doctor sent for. While the breast is full and hard all over, not much
apprehension need be felt. It is when lumps appear that the physician
should be notified, that he may, if possible, prevent the formation of
abscesses.

While a woman is nursing she should eat plenty of nourishing food--milk,
oatmeal, cracked wheat, and good juicy, fresh meat, boiled, roasted, or
broiled, but not fried. Between each meal, before going to bed, and once
during the night, she should take a cup of cocoa, gruel made with milk,
good beef tea, mutton broth, or any warm, nutritive drink. Tea and coffee
are to be avoided. It is important to keep the digestion in order and the
bowels should be carefully regulated as a means to this end. If necessary,
any of the laxative mineral waters can be used for this purpose, or a
teaspoonful of compound licorice powder taken at night. Powerful cathartic
medicines should be avoided because of their effect upon the baby. The
child should be weaned at nine months old, unless this time comes in very
hot weather, or the infant is so delicate that a change of food would be
injurious. If the mother is not strong her nurseling will sometimes thrive
better upon artificial food than on its natural nourishment. By gradually
lengthening the interval between the nursing and feeding the child, when it
is hungry, the weaning can be accomplished without much trouble.

A young mother should wear warm underclothing, thick stockings and a
flannel jacket over her night dress, unless she is in the habit of wearing
an under vest. If the body is not protected by warm clothing there is an
undue demand upon the nervous energy to keep up the vital heat, and nerve
force is wasted by the attempt to compel the system to do what ought to be
done for it by outside means.

[Illustration]

{288}

How to Have Beautiful Children.

[Illustration]

1. PARENTAL INFLUENCE.--The art of having handsome children has been a
question that has interested the people of all ages and of all
nationalities. There is no longer a question as to the influence that
parents may and do exert upon their offspring, and it is shown in other
parts of this book that beauty depends largely on the condition of health
at the time of conception. It is therefore of no little moment that parents
should guard carefully their own health as well as that of their children,
that they may develop a vigorous constitution. There cannot be beauty
without good health.

2. MARRYING TOO EARLY.--We know that marriage at too early an age, or too
late in life, is apt to produce imperfectly {289} developed children, both
mentally and physically. The causes are self-evident: A couple marrying too
young, they lack maturity and consequently will impart weakness to their
offspring; while on the other hand persons marrying late in life fail to
find that normal condition which is conducive to the health and vigor of
offspring.

3. CROSSING OF TEMPERAMENTS AND NATIONALITIES.--The crossing of
temperaments and nationalities beautifies offspring. If young persons of
different nationalities marry, their children under proper hygienic laws
are generally handsome and healthy. For instance, an American and German or
an Irish and German uniting in marriage, produces better looking children
than those marrying in the same nationality. Persons of different
temperaments uniting in marriage, always produces a good effect upon
offspring.

4. THE PROPER TIME.--To obtain the best results, conception should take
place only when both parties are in the best physical condition. If either
parent is in any way indisposed at the time of conception the results will
be seen in the health of the child. Many children brought in the world with
diseases or other infirmities stamped upon their feeble frames show the
indiscretion and ignorance of parents.

5. DURING PREGNANCY.--During pregnancy the mother should take time for self
improvement and cultivate an interest for admiring beautiful pictures or
engravings which represent cheerful and beautiful figures. Secure a few
good books illustrating art, with some fine representations of statues and
other attractive pictures. The purchase of several illustrated art journals
might answer the purpose.

6. WHAT TO AVOID.--Pregnant mothers should avoid thinking of ugly people,
or those marked by any deformity or disease; avoid injury, fright and
disease of any kind. Also avoid ungraceful position and awkward attitude,
but cultivate grace and beauty in herself. Avoid difficulty with neighbors
or other trouble.

7. GOOD CARE.--She should keep herself in good physical condition, and the
system well nourished, as a want of food always injures the child.

8. THE IMPROVEMENT OF THE MIND.--The mother should read suitable articles
in newspapers or good books, keep her mind occupied. If she cultivates a
desire for intellectual improvement, the same desire will be more or less
manifested in the growth and development of the child. {290}

9. LIKE PRODUCES LIKE, everywhere and always--in general forms and in
particular features--in mental qualities and in bodily conditions--in
tendencies of thought and in habits of action. Let this grand truth be
deeply impressed upon the hearts of all who desire or expect to become
parents.

10. HEREDITY.--Male children generally inherit the peculiar traits and
diseases of the mother and female children those of the father.

11. ADVICE.--"Therefore it is urged that during the period of
utero-gestation, especial pains should be taken to render the life of the
female as harmonious as possible, that her surroundings should all be of a
nature calculated to inspire the mind with thoughts of physical and mental
beauties and perfections, and that she should be guarded against all
influences, of whatever character, having a deteriorating tendency."

[Illustration]

{292}

Education of the Child in the Womb.

    "A lady once interviewed a prominent college president and asked him
    when the education of a child should begin. 'Twenty-five years before
    it is born,' was the prompt reply."

No better answer was ever given to that question. Every mother may well
consider it.

[Illustration: THE BEAUTIFUL BUTTERFLY.]

1. THE UNBORN CHILD AFFECTED BY THE THOUGHTS AND THE SURROUNDINGS OF THE
MOTHER.--That the child is affected in the womb of the mother, through the
influences apparently connected with objects by which she is surrounded,
appears to have been well known in ancient days, as well as at the present
time.

2. EVIDENCES.--Many evidences are found in ancient history, especially
among the refined nations, showing that certain expedients were resorted to
by which their females, during the period of utero-gestation, were
surrounded by the superior refinements of the age, with the hope of thus
making upon them impressions which should have the effect of communicating
certain desired qualities to the offspring. For this reason apartments were
adorned with statuary and paintings, and special pains were taken not only
to convey favorable impressions, but also to guard against unfavorable ones
being made, upon the mind of the pregnant woman.

3. HANKERING AFTER GIN.--A certain mother while pregnant, longed for gin,
which could not be gotten; and her child cried incessantly for six weeks
till gin was given it, which it eagerly clutched and drank with ravenous
greediness, stopped crying, and became healthy.

4. BEGIN TO EDUCATE CHILDREN AT CONCEPTION, and continue during their
entire carriage. Yet maternal study, of little account before the sixth,
after it, is most promotive of talents; which, next to goodness are the
father's joy and the mother's pride. What pains are taken after they are
born, to render them prodigies of learning, by the best of schools and
teachers from their third year; whereas their mother's study, three months
before their birth, would improve their intellects infinitely more.

5. MOTHERS, DOES GOD THUS PUT the endowment of your darlings into your
moulding power? Then tremble in view of its necessary responsibilities, and
learn how to wield them for their and your temporal and eternal happiness.
{293}

6. QUALITIES OF THE MIND.--The qualities of the mind are perhaps as much
liable to hereditary transmission as bodily configuration.

[Illustration]

Memory, intelligence, judgment, imagination, passions, diseases, and what
is usually called genius, are often very markedly traced in the
offspring.--I have known mental impressions forcibly impressed upon the
offspring at the time of conception, as concomitant of some peculiar
eccentricity, idiosyncracy, morbidness, waywardness, irritability, or
proclivity of either one or both parents.

7. THE PLASTIC BRAIN.--The plastic brain of the foetus is prompt to receive
all impressions. It retains them, and they become the characteristics of
the child and the man. Low spirits, violent passions, irritability,
frivolity, in the pregnant woman, leave indelible marks on the unborn
child.

8. FORMATION OF CHARACTER.--I believe that pre-natal influences may do as
much in the formation of character as all the education that can come
after, and that mothers may, in a measure, "will," what that influence
shall be, and that, as knowledge on the subject increases, it will be more
and more under their control. In that, as in everything else, things that
would be possible with one mother would not be with another, and measures
that would be successful with one would produce opposite results from the
other.

9. A HISTORICAL ILLUSTRATION.--A woman rode side by side with her soldier
husband, and witnessed the drilling of troops for battle. The scene
inspired her with a deep longing to see a battle and share in the
excitements of the {294} conquerors. This was but a few months before her
boy was born, and his name was Napoleon.

10. A MUSICIAN.--The following was reported by Dr. F. W. Moffatt, in the
mother's own language: "When I was first pregnant, I wished my offspring to
be a musician, so, during the period of that pregnancy, settled my whole
mind on music, and attended every musical entertainment I possibly could. I
had my husband, who has a violin, to play for me by the hour. When the
child was born, it was a girl, which grew and prospered, and finally became
an expert musician."

11. MURDEROUS INTENT.--The mother of a young man, who was hung not long
ago, was heard to say: "I tried to get rid of him before he was born; and,
oh, how I wish now that I had succeeded!" She added that it was the only
time she had attempted anything of the sort; but, because of home troubles,
she became desperate, and resolved that her burdens should not be made any
greater. Does it not seem probable that the murderous intent, even though
of short duration, was communicated to the mind of the child, and resulted
in the crime for which he was hung?

12. THE ASSASSIN OF GARFIELD.--Guiteau's father was a man of integrity and
considerable intellectual ability. His children were born in quick
succession, and the mother was obliged to work very hard. Before this child
was born, she resorted to every means, though unsuccessful, to produce
abortion. The world knows the result. Guiteau's whole life was full of
contradictions. There was little self-controlling power in him; no common
sense, and not a vestige of remorse or shame. In his wild imagination, he
believed himself capable of doing the greatest work, and of filling the
loftiest station in life. Who will dare question that this mother's effort
to destroy him while in embryo was the main cause in bringing him to the
level of the brutes?

13. CAUTION.--Any attempt, on the part of the mother, to destroy her child
before birth, is liable, if unsuccessful, to produce murderous tendencies.
Even harboring murderous thoughts, whether toward her own child or not,
might be followed by similar results.

 "The great King of kings
  Hath in the table of His law commanded
  That thou shalt do no murder. Wilt thou, then,
  Spurn at His edict, and fulfill a man's?
  Take heed, for He holds vengeance in His hand
  To hurl upon their heads that break his law."--RICHARD III., _Act 1._

       *       *       *       *       *


{295}

How to Calculate the Time of Expected Labor.

[Illustration: The Embryo In Sixty Days.]

1. The table on the opposite page has been very accurately compiled, and
will be very helpful to those who desire the exact time.

2. The duration of pregnancy is from 278 to 280 days, or nearly forty
weeks. The count should be made from the beginning of the last
menstruation, and add eight days on account of the possibility of it
occurring within that period The heavier the child the longer is the
duration; the younger the woman the longer time it often requires. The
duration is longer in married than in unmarried women; the duration is
liable to be longer if the child is a female.

3. MOVEMENT.--The first movement is generally felt on the 135th day after
impregnation.

4. GROWTH OF THE EMBRYO.--About the twentieth day the embryo resembles the
appearance of an ant or lettuce seed; the 30th day the embryo is as large
as a common horse fly; the 40th day the form resembles that of a person; in
sixty days the limbs begin to form, and in four months the embryo takes the
name of foetus.

5. Children born after seven or eight months can survive and develop to
maturity.

       *       *       *       *       *


{296}

DURATION OF PREGNANCY.

DIRECTIONS.--Find in the upper horizontal line the date on which the last
menstruation ceased; the figure beneath gives the date of expected
confinement (280 days).

   ________________________________________________________________
  |Jan. | 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |Oct. | 8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 |
  |     |                                                         |
  |Feb. | 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |Nov. | 8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 |
  |     |                                                         |
  |Mar. | 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |Dec. | 6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 |
  |     |                                                         |
  |Apr. | 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |Jan. | 6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 |
  |     |                                                         |
  |May  | 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |Feb. | 5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 |
  |     |                                                         |
  |June | 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |Mar. | 8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 |
  |     |                                                         |
  |July | 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |Apr. | 7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 |
  |     |                                                         |
  |Aug. | 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |May  | 8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 21 21 22 23 24 25 26 |
  |     |                                                         |
  |Sept.| 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |June | 8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 21 21 22 23 24 25 26 |
  |     |                                                         |
  |Oct. | 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |July | 8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 |
  |     |                                                         |
  |Nov. | 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |Aug. | 8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 |
  |     |                                                         |
  |Dec. | 1  2  3  4  5  6  7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 |
  |Sep. | 7  8  9 10 11 12 13 14 15 16 17 18 19 20 21 22 23 24 25 |
   ________________________________________________________________

  _________________________________________________
  Jan. | 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 |     |
  Oct. | 27 28 29 30 31  1  2  3  4  5  6  7 |Nov. |
       |                                     |     |
  Feb. | 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28          |     |
  Nov. | 27 28 29 30  1  2  3  4  5          |Dec. |
       |                                     |     |
  Mar. | 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 19 30 31 |     |
  Dec. | 25 26 27 28 29 30 31  1  2  3  4  5 |Jan. |
       |                                     |     |
  Apr. | 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 |     |
  Jan. | 25 26 27 28 29 30 31  1  2  3  4  5 |Feb. |
       |                                     |     |
  May  | 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 |     |
  Feb. | 24 25 26 27 28  1  2  3  4  5  6  7 |Mar. |
       |                                     |     |
  June | 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30    |     |
  Mar. | 27 28 29 30 31  1  2  3  4  5  6    |Apr. |
       |                                     |     |
  July | 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30    |     |
  Apr. | 26 27 28 29 30  1  2  3  4  5  6    |May  |
       |                                     |     |
  Aug. | 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 |     |
  May  | 27 28 29 30 31  1  2  3  4  5  6  7 |June |
       |                                     |     |
  Sept.| 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30    |     |
  June | 27 28 29 30  1  2  3  4  5  6  7    |July |
       |                                     |     |
  Oct. | 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30 31 |     |
  July | 27 28 29 30 31  1  2  3  4  5  6  7 |Aug. |
       |                                     |     |
  Nov. | 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 28 29 30    |     |
  Aug. | 27 28 29 30 31  1  2  3  4  5  6    |Sep. |
       |                                     |     |
  Dec. | 20 21 22 23 24 25 26 27 23 29 30 31 |     |
  Sep. | 26 27 28 29 30  1  2  3  4  5  6  7 |Oct. |
  _________________________________________________|

[Illustration: _"The House We Live In" for nine months: showing the ample
room provided by Nature when uncontracted by inherited inferiority of form
or artificial dressing._]

[Illustration: _A Contracted Pelvis. Deformity and Insufficient Space._]

{297}

19. THIS IS WHAT DR. STOCKHAM says: "If women had _common sense_, instead
of _fashion sense_, the corset would not exist. There are not words in the
English language to express my convictions upon this subject. The corset
more than any other one thing is responsible for woman's being the victim
of disease and doctors....

"What is the effect upon the child? One-half of the children born in this
country die before they are five years of age. Who can tell how much this
state of things is due to the enervation of maternal life forces by the one
instrument of torture?

"I am a temperance woman. No one can realize more than I the devastation
and ruin alcohol in its many tempting forms has brought to the human
family. Still I solemnly believe that in weakness and deterioration of
health, the corset has more to answer for than intoxicating drinks." When
asked how far advanced a woman should be in pregnancy before she laid aside
her corset, Dr. Stockham said with emphasis: "_The corset should not be
worn for two hundred years before pregnancy takes place._ Ladies, it will
take that time at least to overcome the ill-effect of tight garments which
you think so essential."

20. PAINLESS PREGNANCY AND CHILD-BIRTH.--"Some excellent popular volumes,"
says Dr. Haff, "have been largely devoted to directions how to secure a
comfortable period of pregnancy and painless delivery. After much conning
of these worthy efforts to impress a little common sense upon the
sisterhood, we are convinced that all may be summed up under the simple
heads of: (1) An unconfined and lightly burdened waist; (2) Moderate but
persistent outdoor exercise, of which walking is the best form; (3) A
plain, unstimulating, chiefly fruit and vegetable diet; (4) Little or no
intercourse during the time.

"These are hygienic rules of benefit under any ordinary conditions; yet
they are violated by almost every pregnant lady. If they are followed,
biliousness, indigestion, constipation, swollen limbs, morning sickness and
nausea--all will absent themselves or be much lessened. In pregnancy, more
than at any other time, corsets are injurious. The waist and abdomen must
be allowed to expand freely with the growth of the child. The great process
of _evolution_ must have room."

21. IN ADDITION, we can do no better than quote the following
recapitulation by Dr. Stockham in her famous {298} Tokology: "To give a
woman the greatest immunity from suffering during pregnancy, prepare her
for a safe and comparatively easy delivery, and insure a speedy recovery,
all hygienic conditions must be observed.

"The dress must give:

"1. Freedom of movement;

"2. No pressure upon any part of the body;

"3. No more weight than is essential for warmth, and both weight and warmth
evenly distributed.

"These requirements necessitate looseness, lightness and warmth, which can
be obtained from the union underclothes, a princess skirt and dress, with a
shoe that allows full development and use of the foot. While decoration and
elegance are desirable, they should not sacrifice comfort and convenience.

22. "LET THE DIET BE LIGHT, plain and nutritious. Avoid fats and sweets,
relying mainly upon fruits and grain that contain little of the mineral
salts. By this diet bilious and inflammatory conditions are overcome, the
development of bone in the foetus lessened, and muscles necessary in labor
nourished and strengthened.

23. "EXERCISE should be sufficient and of such a character as will bring
into action gently every muscle of the body; but must particularly develop
the muscles of the trunk, abdomen and groin, that are specially called into
action in labor. Exercise, taken faithfully and systematically, more than
any other means assists assimilative processes and stimulates the organs of
excretion to healthy action.

24. "BATHING MUST BE FREQUENT and regular. Unless in special conditions the
best results are obtained from tepid or cold bathing, which invigorates the
system and overcomes nervousness. The sitz-bath is the best therapeutic and
hygienic measure within the reach of the pregnant woman.

"Therefore, to establish conditions which will overcome many previous
infractions of law, _dress_ naturally and physiologically; _live_ much of
the time _out of doors_; have _abundance_ of _fresh air_ in the house; let
_exercise_ be _sufficient_ and _systematic_; pursue a _diet of fruit_, rice
and vegetables; _regular rest_ must be faithfully taken; _abstain_ from the
sexual relation. To those who will commit themselves to this course of
life, patiently and persistently carrying it out through the period of
gestation, the possibilities of attaining a healthy, natural, painless
parturition will be remarkably increased. {299}

25. "IF THE FIRST EXPERIMENT should not result in a painless labor, it
without doubt will prove the beginning of sound health. Persisted in
through years of married life, the ultimate result will be more and more
closely approximated, while there will be less danger of diseases after
childbirth and better and more vigorous children will be produced.

"Then pregnancy by every true woman will be desired, and instead of being a
period of disease, suffering and direful forebodings, will become a period
of health, exalted pleasure and holiest anticipations. Motherhood will be
deemed the choicest of earth's blessings; women will rejoice in a glad
maternity and for any self-denial will be compensated by healthy, happy,
buoyant, grateful children."

[Illustration]

{300} [Illustration: A HAPPY MOTHER.]

{301}

Solemn Lessons for Parents.

[Illustration: JOAN OF ARC.]

1. EXCESSIVE PLEASURES AND PAINS.--A woman during her time of pregnancy
should of all women be most carefully tended, and kept from violent and
excessive pleasures and pains; and at that time she should cultivate
gentleness, benevolence and kindness. {302}

2. HEREDITARY EFFECTS.--Those who are born to become insane do not
necessarily spring from insane parents, or from any ancestry having any
apparent taint of lunacy in their blood, but they do receive from their
progenitors certain impressions upon their mental and moral, as well as
their physical beings, which impressions, like an iron mould, fix and shape
their subsequent destinies. Hysteria in the mother may develop insanity in
the child, while drunkenness in the father may impel epilepsy, or mania, in
the son. Ungoverned passions in the parents may unloose the furies of
unrestrained madness in the minds of their children, and the bad treatment
of the wife may produce sickly or weak-minded children.

3. THE INFLUENCE OF PREDOMINANT PASSION may be transmitted from the parent
to the child, just as surely as similarity of looks. It has been truly said
that "the faculties which predominate in power and activity in the parents,
when the organic existence of the child commences, determine its future
mental disposition." A bad mental condition of the mother may produce
serious defects upon her unborn child.

4. THE SINGULAR EFFECTS produced on the unborn child by the sudden mental
emotions of the mother are remarkable examples of a kind of electrotyping
on the sensitive surfaces of living forms. It is doubtless true that the
mind's action in such cases may increase or diminish the molecular deposits
in the several portions of the system. The precise place which each
separate particle assumes in the new organic structure may be determined by
the influence of thought or feeling. Perfect love and perfect harmony
should exist between wife and husband during this vital period.

5. AN ILLUSTRATION.--If a sudden and powerful emotion of a woman's mind
exerts such an influence upon her stomach as to excite vomiting, and upon
her heart as almost to arrest its motion and induce fainting, can we
believe that it will have no effect upon her womb and the fragile being
contained within it? Facts and reason then, alike demonstrate the reality
of the influence, and much practical advantage would result to both parent
and child, were the conditions and extent of its operations better
understood.

6. PREGNANT WOMEN should not be exposed to causes likely to distress or
otherwise strongly impress their minds. A consistent life with worthy
objects constantly kept in mind should be the aim and purpose of every
expectant mother. {303}

CASES CITED.

We selected only a few cases to illustrate the above statement. Thousands
of cases occur every year that might be cited to illustrate these
principles. A mother cannot be too careful, and she should have the hearty
co-operation and assistance of her husband. We quote the following cases
from Dr. Pancoast's Medical Guide, who is no doubt one of the best
authorities on the subject.

1. A woman bitten on the vulva by a dog, bore a child having a similar
wound on the glans penis. The boy suffered from epilepsy, and when the fit
came on, or during sleep, was frequently heard to cry out, "The dog bites
me!"

2. A pregnant woman who was suddenly alarmed from seeing her husband come
home with one side of his face swollen and distorted by a blow, bore a girl
with a purple swelling upon the same side of the face.

3. A woman, who was forced to be present at the opening of a calf by a
butcher, bore a child with all its bowels protruding from the abdomen. She
was aware at the time of something going on within the womb.

4. A pregnant woman fell into a violent passion at not being able to
procure a particular piece of meat of a butcher; she bled at the nose, and
wiping the blood from her lips, bore a child wanting a lip.

5. A woman absent from home became alarmed by seeing a great fire in the
direction of her own house, bore a child with a distinct mark of the flame
upon its forehead.

6. A woman who had borne healthy children, became frightened by a beggar
with a wooden leg and a stumped arm, who threatened to embrace her. Her
next child had one stump leg and two stump arms.

7. A woman frightened in her first pregnancy by the sight of a child with a
hare lip, had a child with a deformity of the same kind. Her second child
had a deep slit, and the third a mark of a similar character or modified
hare lips. In this instance the morbid mind of the mother affected several
successive issues of her body.

8. A pregnant woman became frightened at a lizard jumping into her bosom.
She bore a child with a fleshy excrescence exactly resembling a lizard,
growing from the breast, adhering by the head and neck.

       *       *       *       *       *


{304}

The Care of New-Born Infants.

[Illustration]

1. The first thing to be done ordinarily is to give the little stranger a
bath by using soap and warm water. To remove the white material that
usually covers the child use olive oil, goose oil or lard, and apply it
with a soft piece of worn flannel, and when the child is entirely clean rub
all off with a fresh piece of flannel.

2. Many physicians in the United States recommend a thorough oiling of the
child with pure lard or olive oil, and then rub dry as above stated. By
these means water is avoided, and with it much risk of taking cold.

3. The application of brandy or liquor is entirely unnecessary, and
generally does more injury than good. {305}

4. If an infant should breathe feebly, or exhibit other signs of great
feebleness, it should not be washed at once, but allowed to remain quiet
and undisturbed, warmly wrapped up until the vital actions have acquired a
fair degree of activity.

5. DRESSING THE NAVEL.--There is nothing better for dressing the navel than
absorbent antiseptic cotton. There needs be no grease or oil upon the
cotton. After the separation of the cord the navel should be dressed with a
little cosmoline, still using the absorbent cotton. The navel string
usually separates in a week's time; it may be delayed for twice this length
of time, this will make no material difference, and the rule is to allow it
to drop off of its own accord.

6. THE CLOTHING OF THE INFANT.--The clothing of the infant should be light,
soft and _perfectly_ loose. A soft flannel band is necessary _only_ until
the navel is healed. Afterwards discard bands entirely if you wish your
babe to be happy and well. Make the dresses "Mother Hubbard"--Put on first
a soft woolen shirt, then prepare the flannel skirts to hang from the neck
like a slip. Make one kind with sleeves and one just like it without
sleeves, then white muslin skirts (if they are desired), all the same way.
Then baby is ready for any weather. In intense heat simply put on the one
flannel slip with sleeves, leaving off the shirt. In Spring and Fall the
shirt and skirt with no sleeves. In cold weather shirt and both skirts.
These garments can be all put on at once, thus making the process of
dressing very quick and easy. These are the most approved modern styles for
dressing infants, and with long cashmere stockings pinned to the diapers
the little feet are free to kick with no old-fashioned pinning blanket to
torture the naturally active, healthy child, and retard its development. If
tight bands are an injury to grown people, then in the name of pity
emancipate the poor little infant from their torture!

7. THE DIAPER.--Diapers should be of soft linen, and great care should be
exercised not to pin them too tightly. Never dry them, but always wash them
thoroughly before being used again.

8. The band need not be worn after the navel has healed so that it requires
no dressing, as it serves no purpose save to keep in place the dressing of
the navel. The child's body should be kept thoroughly warm around the
chest, bowels and feet. Give the heart and lungs plenty of room to heave.

9. The proper time for shortening the clothes is about three months in
Summer and six months in Winter. {306}

10. INFANT BATHING.--The first week of a child's life it should not be
entirely stripped and washed. It is too exhausting. After a child is over a
week old it should be bathed every day; after a child is three weeks old it
may be put in the water and supported with one hand while it is being
washed with the other. Never, however, allow it to remain too long in the
water. From ten to twenty minutes is the limit. Use Pears' soap or castile
soap, and with a sponge wipe quickly, or use a soft towel.

       *       *       *       *       *


NURSING.

[Illustration]

1. The new-born infant requires only the mother's milk. The true mother
will nurse her child if it is a possibility. The infant will thrive better
and have many more chances for life.

2. The mother's milk is the natural food, and nothing can fully take its
place. It needs no feeding for the first few days as it was commonly deemed
necessary a few years ago. The secretions in the mother's breast are
sufficient.

3. ARTIFICIAL FOOD.--Tokology says: "The best artificial food is cream
reduced and sweetened with sugar of milk. Analysis shows that human milk
contains more cream and sugar and less casein than the milk of animals.
{307}

4. Milk should form the basis of all preparations of food. If the milk is
too strong, indigestion will follow, and the child will lose instead of
gaining strength.

WEANING.--The weaning of the child depends much upon the strength and
condition of the mother. If it does not occur in hot weather, from nine to
twelve months is as long as any child should be nursed.

FOOD IN WEANING.--Infants cry a great deal during weaning, but a few days
of patient perseverance will overcome all difficulties. Give the child
purely a milk diet, Graham bread, milk crackers and milk, or a little milk
thickened with boiled rice, a little jelly, apple sauce, etc., may be
safely used. Cracked wheat, oatmeal, wheat germ, or anything of that kind
thoroughly cooked and served with a little cream and sugar, is an excellent
food.

MILK DRAWN FROM THE BREASTS.--If the mother suffers considerably from the
milk gathering in the breast after weaning the child, withdraw it by taking
a bottle that holds about a pint or a quart, putting a piece of cloth wrung
out in warm water around the bottle, then fill it with boiling water, pour
the water out and apply the bottle to the breast, and the bottle cooling
will form a vacuum and will withdraw the milk into the bottle. This is one
of the best methods now in use.

RETURN OF THE MENSES.--If the menses return while the mother is nursing,
the child should at once be weaned, for the mother's milk no longer
contains sufficient nourishment. In case the mother should become pregnant
while the child is nursing it should at once be weaned, or serious results
will follow to the health of the child. A mother's milk is no longer
sufficiently rich to nourish the child or keep it in good health.

CARE OF THE BOTTLE.--If the child is fed on the bottle, great care should
be taken in keeping it absolutely clean. Never use white rubber nipples. A
plain form of bottle with a black rubber nipple is preferable.

CHILDREN should not be permitted to come to the table until two years of
age.

CHAFING.--One of the best remedies is powdered lycopodium; apply it every
time the babe is cleaned; but first wash with pure castile soap; Pears'
soap is also good. A preparation of oxide of zinc is also highly
recommended. Chafing sometimes results from an acid condition of the
stomach; in that case give a few doses of castoria.

COLIC.--If an infant is seriously troubled with colic, there is nothing
better than camomile or catnip tea. Procure the leaves and make tea and
give it as warm as the babe can bear.

       *       *       *       *       *


{308}

FEEDING INFANTS.

1. The best food for infants is mother's milk; next best is cow's milk.
Cow's milk contains about three times as much curd and one-half as much
sugar, and it should be reduced with two parts of water.

2. In feeding cow's milk there is too little cream and too little sugar,
and there is no doubt no better preparation than Mellin's food to mix it
with (according to directions).

3. Children being fed on food lacking fat generally have their teeth come
late; their muscles will be flabby and bones soft. Children will be too fat
when their food contains too much sugar. Sugar always makes their flesh
soft and flabby.

4. During the first two months the baby should be fed every two hours
during the day, and two or three times during the night, but no more. Ten
or eleven feedings for twenty-four hours are all a child will bear and
remain healthy. At three months the child may be fed every three hours
instead of every two.

5. Children can be taught regular habits by being fed and put to sleep at
the same time every day and evening. Nervous diseases are caused by
irregular hours of sleep and diet, and the use of soothing medicines.

6. A child five or six months old should not be fed during the night--from
nine in the evening until six or seven in the morning, as overfeeding
causes most of the wakefulness and nervousness of children during the
night.

7. If a child vomits soon after taking the bottle, and there is an
appearance of undigested food in the stool, it is a sign of overfeeding. If
a large part of the bottle has been vomited, avoid the next bottle at
regular time and pass over one bottle. If the child is nursing the same
principles apply.

8. If a child empties its bottle and sucks vigorously its fingers after the
bottle is emptied, it is very evident that the child is not fed enough, and
should have its food gradually increased.

9. Give the baby a little cold water several times a day.

       *       *       *       *       *


INFANTILE CONVULSIONS.

DEFINITION.--An infantile convulsion corresponds to a chill in an adult,
and is the most common brain affection among children.

CAUSES.--Anything that irritates the nervous system may cause convulsions
in the child, as teething, indigestible food, worms, dropsy of the brain,
hereditary constitution, or they may be the accompanying symptom in nearly
all the {309} acute diseases of children, or when the eruption is
suppressed in eruptive diseases.

SYMPTOMS.--In case of convulsions of a child parents usually become
frightened, and very rarely do the things that should be done in order to
afford relief. The child, previous to the fit, is usually irritable, and
the twitching of the muscles of the face may be noticed, or it may come on
suddenly without warning. The child becomes insensible, clenches its hands
tightly, lips turn blue, and the eyes become fixed, usually frothing from
the mouth with head turned back. The convulsion generally lasts two or
three minutes; sometimes, however, as long as ten or fifteen minutes, but
rarely.

REMEDY.--Give the child a warm bath and rub gently. Clothes wrung out of
cold water and applied to the lower and back part of the head and plenty of
fresh air will usually relieve the convulsion. Be sure and loosen the
clothing around the child's neck. After the convulsion is over, give the
child a few doses of potassic bromide, and an injection of castor oil if
the abdomen is swollen. Potassic bromide should be kept in the house, to
use in case of necessity.

[Illustration]

{310}

Pains and Ills in Nursing.

[Illustration: The City Hospital.--A Homeless and Friendless Mother.]

1. SORE NIPPLES.--If a lady, during the latter few months of her pregnancy,
were to adopt "means to harden the nipples," sore nipples during the period
of suckling would not be so prevalent as they are.

2. CAUSE.--A sore nipple is frequently produced by the injudicious custom
of allowing the child to have the nipple {311} almost constantly in his
mouth. Another frequent cause of a sore nipple is from the babe having the
canker. Another cause of a sore nipple is from the mother, after the babe
has been sucking, putting up the nipple wet. She, therefore, ought always
to dry the nipple, not by rubbing, but by dabbing it with a soft cambric or
lawn handkerchief, or with a piece of soft linen rag--one or the other of
which ought always to be at hand--every time directly after the child has
done sucking, and just before applying any of the following powders or
lotions to the nipple.

3. REMEDIES.--One of the best remedies for a sore nipple is the following
powder:

Take of--Borax, one drachm; Powdered Starch, seven drachms.

Mix.--A pinch of the powder to be frequently applied to the nipple.

If the above does not cure, try Glycerine by applying it each time after
nursing.

4. GATHERED BREAST.--A healthy-woman with a well-developed breast and a
good nipple, scarcely, if ever, has a gathered bosom; it is the delicate,
the ill-developed breasted and worse-developed nippled lady who usually
suffers from this painful complaint. And why? The evil can generally be
traced to girlhood. If she be brought up luxuriously, her health and her
breasts are sure to be weakened, and thus to suffer, more especially if the
development of the bosoms and nipples has been arrested and interfered with
by tight stays and corsets. Why, the nipple is by them drawn in, and
retained on the level with the breast--countersunk--as though it were of no
consequence to her future well-being, as though it were a thing of nought.

5. TIGHT LACERS.--Tight lacers will have to pay the penalties of which they
little dream. Oh, the monstrous folly of such proceedings! When will
mothers awake from their lethargy? It is high time that they did so! From
the mother having "no nipple," the effects of tight lacing, many a home has
been made childless, the babe not being able to procure its proper
nourishment, and dying in consequence! It is a frightful state of things!
But fashion, unfortunately, blinds the eyes and deafens the ears of its
votaries!

6. BAD BREAST.--A gathered bosom, or "bad breast," as it is sometimes
called, is more likely to occur after a first confinement and during the
first month. Great care, therefore, ought to be taken to avoid such a
misfortune. A gathered breast is frequently owing to the carelessness of a
{312} mother in not covering her bosoms during the time she is suckling.
Too much attention cannot be paid to keeping the breasts comfortably warm.
This, during the act of nursing, should be done by throwing either a shawl
or a square of flannel over the neck, shoulders, and bosoms.

7. ANOTHER CAUSE.--Another cause of gathered breasts arises from a mother
sitting up in bed to suckle her babe. He ought to be accustomed to take the
bosom while she is lying down; if this habit is not at first instituted, it
will be difficult to adopt it afterwards. Good habits may be taught a child
from earliest babyhood.

8. FAINTNESS.--When a nursing mother feels faint, she ought immediately to
lie down and take a little nourishment; a cup of tea with the yolk of an
egg beaten up in it, or a cup of warm milk, or some beef-tea, any of which
will answer the purpose extremely well. Brandy, or any other spirit we
would not recommend, as it would only cause, as soon as the immediate
effects of the stimulant had gone off, a greater depression to ensue; not
only so, but the frequent taking of brandy might become a habit--a
necessity--which would be a calamity deeply to be deplored!

9. STRONG PURGATIVES.--Strong purgatives during this period are highly
improper, as they are apt to give pain to the infant, as well as to injure
the mother. If it be absolutely necessary to give physic, the mildest, such
as a dose of castor oil, should be chosen.

10. HABITUALLY COSTIVE.--When a lady who is nursing is habitually costive,
she ought to eat brown instead of white bread. This will, in the majority
of cases, enable her to do without an aperient. The brown bread may be made
with flour finely ground all one way; or by mixing one part of bran and
three parts of fine wheaten flour together, and then making it in the usual
way into bread. Treacle instead of butter, on the brown bread increases its
efficacy as an aperient; and raw should be substituted for lump sugar in
her tea.

11. TO PREVENT CONSTIPATION.--Stewed prunes, or stewed French plums, or
stewed Normandy pippins, are excellent remedies to prevent constipation.
The patient ought to eat, every morning, a dozen or fifteen of them. The
best way to stew either prunes or French plums, is the following:--Put a
pound of either prunes or French plums, and two tablespoonfuls of raw
sugar, into a brown jar; cover them with water; put them into a slow oven,
and stew them for three or four hours. Both stewed rhubarb and stewed {313}
pears often act as mild and gentle aperients. Muscatel raisins, eaten at
dessert, will oftentimes without medicine relieve the bowels.

12. COLD WATER.--A tumblerful of cold water, taken early every morning,
sometimes effectually relieves the bowels; indeed, few people know the
value of cold water as an aperient--it is one of the best we possess, and,
unlike drug aperients, can never by any possibility do any harm. An
injection of warm water is one of the best ways to relieve the bowels.

13. WELL-COOKED VEGETABLES.--Although a nursing mother ought, more
especially if she be costive, to take a variety of well-cooked vegetables,
such as potatoes, asparagus, cauliflower, French beans, spinach, stewed
celery and turnips; she should avoid eating greens, cabbages, and pickles,
as they would be likely to affect the babe, and might cause him to suffer
from gripings, from pain, and "looseness" of the bowels.

14. SUPERSEDE THE NECESSITY OF TAKING PHYSIC.--Let me again--for it cannot
be too urgently insisted upon--strongly advise a nursing mother to use
every means in the way of diet, etc., to supersede the necessity of taking
physic (opening medicine), as the repetition of aperients injures, and that
severely, both herself and child. Moreover, the more opening medicine she
swallows, the more she requires; so that if she once gets into the habit of
regularly taking physic, the bowels will not act without them. What a
miserable existence to be always swallowing physic!

[Illustration]

{314}

Home Lessons in Nursing Sick Children.

[Illustration: HEALTHY YOUTH AND RIPE OLD AGE.]

1. MISMANAGEMENT.--Every doctor knows that a large share of the ills to
which infancy is subject are directly traceable to mismanagement. Troubles
of the digestive system are, for the most part due to errors, either in the
selection of the food or in the preparation of it.

2. RESPIRATORY DISEASES.--Respiratory diseases or the diseases of the
throat and lungs have their origin, as a rule, in want of care and judgment
in matters of clothing, bathing and exposure to cold and drafts. A child
should always be dressed to suit the existing temperature of the weather.
{315}

3. NERVOUS DISEASES.--Nervous diseases are often aggravated if not caused
by over-stimulation of the brain, by irregular hours of sleep, or by the
use of "soothing" medicines, or eating indigestible food.

4. SKIN AFFECTIONS.--Skin affections are generally due to want of proper
care of the skin, to improper clothing or feeding, or to indiscriminate
association with nurses and children, who are the carriers of contagious
diseases.

5. PERMANENT INJURY.--Permanent injury is often caused by lifting the child
by one hand, allowing it to fall, permitting it to play with sharp
instruments, etc.

6. RULES AND PRINCIPLES.--Every mother should understand the rules and
principles of home nursing. Children are very tender plants and the want of
proper knowledge is often very disastrous if not fatal. Study carefully and
follow the principles and rules which are laid down in the different parts
of this work on nursing and cooking for the sick.

7. WHAT A MOTHER SHOULD KNOW:

    I. INFANT FEEDING.--The care of milk, milk sterilization, care of
    bottles, preparation of commonly employed infant foods, the general
    principles of infant feeding, with rules as to quality and frequency.

    II. BATHING.--The daily bath; the use of hot, cold and mustard baths.

    III. HYGIENE OF THE SKIN. Care of the mouth, eyes and ears.
    Ventilation, temperature, cleanliness, care of napkins, etc.

    IV. TRAINING OF CHILDREN in proper bodily habits. Simple means of
    treatment in sickness, etc.

8. THE CRY OF THE SICK CHILD.--The cry of the child is a language by which
the character of its suffering to some extent may be ascertained. The
manner in which the cry is uttered, or the pitch and tone is generally a
symptom of a certain kind of disease.

9. STOMACHACHE.--The cry of the child in suffering with pain of the stomach
is loud, excitable and spasmodic. The legs are drawn up and as the pain
ceases, they are relaxed and the child sobs itself to sleep, and rests
until awakened again by pain.

10. LUNG TROUBLE.--When a child is suffering with an affection of the lungs
or throat, it never cries loudly or continuously. A distress in breathing
causes a sort of subdued cry and low moaning. If there is a slight cough it
is generally a sign that there is some complication with the lungs. {316}

11. DISEASE OF THE BRAIN.--In disease of the brain the cry is always sharp,
short and piercing. Drowsiness generally follows each spasm of pain.

12. FEVERS.--Children rarely cry when suffering with fever unless they are
disturbed. They should be handled very gently and spoken to in a very quiet
and tender tone of voice.

13. THE CHAMBER OF THE SICK ROOM.--The room of the sick child should be
kept scrupulously clean. No noise should disturb the quiet and rest of the
child. If the weather is mild, plenty of fresh air should be admitted; the
temperature should be kept at about 70 degrees. A thermometer should be
kept in the room, and the air should be changed several times during the
day. This may be done with safety to the child by covering it up with
woolen blankets to protect it from draft, while the windows and doors are
opened. Fresh air often does more to restore the sick child than the
doctor's medicine. Take the best room in the house. If necessary take the
parlor, always make the room pleasant for the sick.

14. VISITORS.--Carefully avoid the conversation of visitors or the loud and
boisterous playing of children in the house. If there is much noise about
the house that cannot be avoided, it is a good plan to put cotton in the
ears of the patient.

15. LIGHT IN THE ROOM.--Light has a tendency to produce nervous
irritability, consequently it is best to exclude as much daylight as
possible and keep the room in a sort of twilight until the child begins to
improve. Be careful to avoid any odor coming from a burning lamp in the
night. When the child begins to recover, give it plenty of sunlight. After
the child begins to get better let in all the sunlight the windows will
admit. Take a south room for the sick bed.

16. SICKNESS IN SUMMER.--If the weather is very hot it is a good plan to
dampen the floors with cold water, or set several dishes of water in the
room, but be careful to keep the patient out of the draft, and avoid any
sudden change of temperature.

17. BATHING.--Bathe every sick child in warm water once a day unless
prohibited by the doctor. If the child has a spasm or any attack of a
serious nervous character in absence of the doctor, place him in a hot bath
at once. Hot water is one of the finest agencies for the cure of nervous
diseases. {317}

[Illustration]

18. SCARLET FEVER AND MEASLES.--Bathe the child in warm water to bring out
the rash, and put in about a dessertspoonful of mustard into each bath.

19. DRINKS.--If a child is suffering with fevers, let it have all the water
it wants. Toast-water will be found nourishing. When the stomach of the
child is in an irritable condition, nourishments containing milk or any
other fluid should be given very sparingly. Barley-water and rice-water are
very soothing to an irritable stomach.

20. FOOD.--Mellin's Food and milk is very nourishing if the child will take
it. Oatmeal gruel, white of eggs, etc. are excellent and nourishing
articles. See "How to cook for the Sick."

21. EATING FRUIT.--Let children who are recovering from sickness eat
moderately of good fresh fruit. Never let a child, whether well or sick,
eat the skins of any kind of fruit. The outer covering of fruit was not
made to eat, and often has poisonous matter very injurious to health upon
its surface. Contagious and infectious diseases are often communicated in
that way.

22. SUDDEN STARTINGS with the thumbs drawn into the palms, portend trouble
with the brain, and often end in convulsions, which are far more serious in
infants than in children. Convulsions in children often result from a
suppression of urine. If you have occasion to believe that such is the
case, get the patient to sweating as soon as possible. Give it a hot bath,
after which cover it up in bed and put bags of hot salt over the lower part
of the abdomen.

23. SYMPTOMS OF INDIGESTION.--If the baby shows symptoms of indigestion, do
not begin giving it medicine. It is wiser to decrease the quantity and
quality of the food and let the little one omit one meal entirely, that his
stomach may rest. Avoid all starchy foods, as the organs of digestion are
not sufficiently developed to receive them.

       *       *       *       *       *


{318}

A Practical Rule for Feeding a Baby on Cow's Milk.

Cow's milk is steadily growing in favor as an artificial food. Country milk
should be used instead of milk purchased in town or city.

RULE--Take the upper half of milk that has stood an hour of two, dilute,
not hardly as much as a third, with sweetened water, and if there is a
tendency to sour stomach, put in a teaspoonful of lime water to every
quart. The milk and water should both be boiled separately. If the baby is
constipated, it is best to heat the milk over boiling water and not allow
it to boil.

INFANT FOOD FOR 24 HOURS.

       Age of Child.           Milk.        Water.         Total.

   2     to 10     days     1-1/4 gills   3-1/4 gills    4-1/2 gills
  10     to 20     days     1-3/4 gills   4-1/4 gills    6     gills
  20     to 30     days     2-1/2 gills   6     gills    8-1/2 gills
   1     to  1-1/2 months   3     gills   6-3/4 gills    9-3/4 gills
   1-1/2 to  2     months   3-1/2 gills   7     gills   10-1/2 gills
   2     to  2-1/2 months   4     gills   7-1/2 gills   11-1/2 gills
   2-1/2 to  3     months   4-1/2 gills   7-1/2 gills   12     gills
   3     to  3-1/2 months   5     gills   7-1/2 gills   12-1/2 gills
   3-1/2 to  4     months   5-1/2 gills   7-1/2 gills   13     gills
   4     to  4-1/2 months   6     gills   7-1/2 gills   13-1/2 gills
   4-1/2 to  5     months   6-1/2 gills   7-1/2 gills   14     gills
   5     to  6     months   7     gills   7     gills   14     gills
   6-1/2 to  7     months   7-1/2 gills   6-1/2 gills   14     gills
   7     to  8     months   8     gills   6     gills   14     gills
   8     to  9     months   8-1/4 gills   6     gills   14-1/4 gills
   9     to 10     months   8-1/2 gills   6     gills   14-1/2 gills
  10     to 11     months   8-3/4 gills   6     gills   14-3/4 gills
  11     to 12     months   9     gills   5-1/2 gills   14-1/2 gills
  12     to 15     months   9-1/4 gills   5-1/4 gills   14-1/2 gills
  15     to 18     months   9-1/2 gills   5     gills   14-1/2 gills
  18 and more      months   10    gills   5     gills   15     gills

       *       *       *       *       *


{319}

HOW TO KEEP A BABY WELL.

[Illustration: A delicate child should never be put into the bath, but
bathed on the lap and kept warmly covered.]

1. The mother's milk is the natural food, and nothing can fully take its
place.

2. The infant's stomach does not readily accommodate itself to changes in
diet; therefore, regularity in quality, quantity and temperature is
extremely necessary.

3. Not until a child is a year old should it be allowed any food except
that of milk, and possibly a little cracker or bread, thoroughly soaked and
softened.

4. Meat should never be given to very young children. The best artificial
food is cream, reduced and sweetened with sugar and milk. No rule can be
given for its reduction. Observation and experience must teach that,
because every child's stomach is governed by a rule of its own.

5. A child can be safely weaned at one year of age, and sometimes less. It
depends entirely upon the season, and upon the health of the child.

6. A child should never be weaned during the warm weather, in June, July or
August.

7. When a child is weaned it may be given, in connection {320} with the
milk diet, some such nourishment as broth, gruel, egg, or some prepared
food.

8. A child should never be allowed to come to the table until two years of
age.

9. A child should never eat much starchy food until four years old.

10. A child should have all the water it desires to drink, but it is
decidedly the best to boil the water first, and allow it to cool. All the
impurities and disease germs are thereby destroyed. This one thing alone
will add greatly to the health and vigor of the child.

11. Where there is a tendency to bowel disorder, a little gum arabic, rice,
or barley may be boiled with the drinking water.

12. If the child uses a bottle it should be kept absolutely clean. It is
best to have two or three bottles, so that one will always be perfectly
clean and fresh.

13. The nipple should be of black or pure rubber, and not of the white or
vulcanized rubber; it should fit over the top of the bottle. No tubes
should ever be used; it is impossible to keep them clean.

14. When the rubber becomes coated, a little coarse salt will clean it.

15. Babies should be fed at regular times. They should also be put to sleep
at regular hours. Regularity is one of the best safeguards to health.

16. Milk for babies and children should be from healthy cows. Milk from
different cows varies, and it is always better for a child to have milk
from the same cow. A farrow cow's milk is preferable, especially if the
child is not very strong.

17. Many of the prepared foods advertised for children are of little
benefit. A few may be good, but what is good for one child may not be for
another. So it must be simply a matter of experiment if any of the
advertised foods are used.

18. It is a physiological fact that an infant is always healthier and
better to sleep alone. It gets better air and is not liable to suffocation.

19. A healthy child should never be fed in less than two hours from the
last time they finished before, gradually lengthening the time as it grows
older. At 4 months 31/2 or 4 hours; at 5 months a healthy child will be
better if given nothing in the night except, perhaps, a little water.

20. Give an infant a little water several times a day.

21. A delicate child the first year should be oiled after each bath. The
oiling may often take the place of the bath, in case of a cold.

22. In oiling a babe, use pure olive oil, and wipe off thoroughly after
each application. For nourishing a weak child use also olive oil.

23. For colds, coughs, croup, etc., use goose oil externally and give a
teaspoonful at bed-time.

       *       *       *       *       *


{321}

HOW TO PRESERVE THE HEALTH AND LIFE OF YOUR INFANT DURING HOT WEATHER.

[Illustration: FOUND UPON THE DOOR STEP.]

_BATHING._

1. Bathe infants daily in tepid water and even twice a day in hot weather.

If delicate they should be sponged instead of immersing them in water, but
cleanliness is absolutely necessary for the health of infants.

_CLOTHING._

2. Put no bands in their clothing, but make all garments to hang loosely
from the shoulders, and have all their clothing _scrupulously clean_; even
the diaper should not be re-used without rinsing. {322}

_SLEEP ALONE._

3. The child should in all cases sleep by itself on a cot or in a crib and
retire at a regular hour. A child _always_ early taught to go to sleep
without rocking or nursing is the healthier and happier for it. Begin _at
birth_ and this will be easily accomplished.

_CORDIALS AND SOOTHING SYRUPS._

4. Never give cordials, soothing syrups, sleeping drops, etc., without the
advice of a physician. A child that frets and does not sleep is either
hungry or ill. _If ill it needs a physician._ Never give candy or cake to
quiet a small child, they are sure to produce disorders of the stomach,
diarrhoea or some other trouble.

_FRESH AIR._

5. Children should have plenty of fresh air summer as well as winter. Avoid
the severe hot sun and the heated kitchen for infants in summer. Heat is
the great destroyer of infants. In excessive hot weather feed them with
chips of ice occasionally, if you have it.

_CLEAN HOUSES._

6. Keep your house clean and cool and well aired night and day. Your
cellars cleared of all rubbish and whitewashed every spring, your drains
cleaned with strong solution of copperas or chloride of lime, poured down
them once a week. Keep your gutters and yards clean and insist upon your
neighbors doing the same.

_EVACUATIONS OF A CHILD._

The healthy motion varies from light orange yellow to greenish yellow, in
number, two to four times daily. Smell should never be offensive. Slimy
mucous-like jelly passages indicate worms. Pale green, offensive, acrid
motions indicate disordered stomach. Dark green indicate acid secretions
and a more serious trouble.

Fetid dark brown stools are present in chronic diarrhoea. Putty-like pasty
passages are due to acidity curdling the milk or to torpid liver. {323}

[Illustration]

_BREAST MILK._

7. Breast milk is the only proper food for infants, until after the second
summer. If the supply is small keep what you have and feed the child in
connection with it, for if the babe is ill this breast milk may be all that
will save its life.

_STERILIZED MILK._

8. Milk is the best food. Goat's milk best, cows milk next. If the child
thrives on this _nothing else_ should be given during the hot weather,
until the front teeth are cut. Get fresh cow's milk twice a day if the
child requires food in the night, pour it into a glass fruit jar with
one-third pure water for a child under three months old, afterwards the
proportion of water may be less and less, also a trifle of sugar may be
added.

Then place the jar in a kettle or pan of cold water, like the bottom of an
oatmeal kettle. Leave the cover of the jar loose. Place it on the stove and
let the water come to a boil and boil ten minutes, screw down the cover
tight and boil ten minutes more, then remove from the fire, and allow it to
cool in the water slowly so as not to break the jar. When partly cool put
on the ice or in a cool place, and keep tightly covered except when the
milk is poured out for use. The glass jar must be kept perfectly clean and
washed {324} and scalded carefully before use. A tablespoonful of lime
water to a bottle of milk will aid indigestion. Discard the bottle as soon
as possible and use a cup which you know is clean, whereas a bottle must be
kept in water constantly when not in use, or the sour milk will make the
child sick. Use no tube for it is exceedingly hard to keep it clean, and if
pure milk cannot be had, condensed milk is admirable and does not need to
be sterilized as the above.

_DIET._

9. Never give babies under two years old such food as grown persons eat.
Their chief diet should be milk, wheat bread and milk, oatmeal, possibly a
little rare boiled egg, but always and chiefly milk. Germ wheat is also
excellent.

_EXERCISE._

10. Children should have exercise in the house as well as outdoors, but
should not be jolted and jumped and jarred in rough play, not rudely rocked
in the cradle, nor carelessly trundled over bumps in their carriages. They
should not be held too much in the arms, but allowed to crawl and kick upon
the floor and develop their limbs and muscles. A child should not be lifted
by its arms, nor dragged along by one hand after it learns to take a few
feeble steps, but when they do learn to walk steadily it is the best of all
exercise, especially in the open air.

Let the children as they grow older romp and play in the open air all they
wish, girls as well as boys. Give the girls an even chance for health,
while they are young at least, and don't mind about their complexion.

[Illustration]

{325}

Infant Teething.

[Illustration]

1. REMARKABLE INSTANCES.--There are instances where babies have been born
with teeth, and, on the other hand, there are cases of persons who have
never had any teeth at all; and others that had double teeth all around in
both upper and lower jaws, but these are rare instances, and may be termed
as a sort of freaks of nature.

2. INFANT TEETHING.--The first teeth generally make their appearance after
the third month, and during the period of teething the child is fretful and
restless, causing sometimes constitutional disturbances, such as diarrhoea,
indigestion, etc. Usually, however, no serious results follow, and no
unnecessary anxiety need be felt, unless the weather is extremely warm,
then there is some danger of summer complaint setting in and seriously
complicating matters.

3. THE NUMBER OF TEETH.--Teeth are generally cut in pairs and make their
appearance first in the front and going backwards until all are complete.
It generally takes about {326} two years for a temporary set of children's
teeth. A child two or three years old should have twenty teeth. After the
age of seven they generally begin to loosen and fall out and permanent
teeth take their place.

4. LANCING THE GUMS.--This is very rarely necessary. There are extreme
cases when the condition of the mouth and health of the child demand a
physician's lance but this should not be resorted to, unless it is
absolutely necessary. When the gums are very much swollen and the tooth is
nearly through, the pains may be relieved by the mother taking a thimble
and pressing it down upon the tooth, the sharp edges of the tooth will cut
through the swollen flesh, and instant relief will follow. A child in a few
hours or a day will be perfectly happy after a very severe and trying time
of sickness.

5. PERMANENT TEETH.--The teeth are firmly inserted in sockets of the upper
and lower jaw. The permanent teeth which follow the temporary teeth, when
complete, are sixteen in each jaw, or thirty-two in all.

6. NAMES OF TEETH.--There are four incisors (front teeth), four cuspids
(eye teeth), four bicuspids (grinders), and four molars (large grinders),
in each jaw. Each tooth is divided into the crown, body, and root. The
crown is the grinding surface; the body--the part projecting from the
jaw--is the seat of sensation and nutrition; the root is that portion of
the tooth which is inserted in the alveolus. The teeth are composed of
dentine (ivory) and enamel. The ivory forms the greater portion of the body
and root, while the enamel covers the exposed surface. The small white
cords communicating with the teeth are the nerves.

[Illustration]

{327}

HOME TREATMENT FOR THE DISEASES OF INFANTS AND CHILDREN.

[Illustration]

1. Out of the 984,000 persons that died during the year of 1890, 227,264
did not reach one year of age, and 400,647 died under five years of age.

What a fearful responsibility therefore rests upon the parents who permit
these hundreds of thousands of children to die annually. This terrible
mortality among children is undoubtedly largely the result of ignorance as
regarding to the proper care and treatment of sick children.

2. For very small children it is always best to use homoeopathic remedies.

_COLIC._

1. Babies often suffer severely with colic. It is not considered dangerous,
but causes considerable suffering.

2. Severe colic is usually the result of derangement of the liver in the
mother, or of her insufficient or improper nourishment, and it occurs more
frequently when the child is from two to five months old. {328}

3. Let the mother eat chiefly barley, wheat and bread, rolled wheat, graham
bread, fish, milk, eggs and fruit. The latter may be freely eaten, avoiding
that which is very sour.

4. A rubber bag or bottle filled with hot water put into a crib, will keep
the child, once quieted, asleep for hours. If a child is suffering from
colic, it should be thoroughly warmed and kept warm.

5. Avoid giving opiates of any kind, such as cordials, Mrs. Winslow's
Soothing Syrup, "Mother's Friend," and various other patent medicines. They
injure the stomach and health of the child, instead of benefiting it.

6. REMEDIES.--A few tablespoonfuls of hot water will often allay a severe
attack of the colic. Catnip tea is also a good remedy.

A drop of essence of peppermint in 6 or 7 teaspoonfuls of hot water will
give relief.

If the stools are green and the child is very restless, give chamomilla.

If the child is suffering from constipation, and undigested curds of milk
appear in its faeces, and the child starts suddenly in its sleep, give nux
vomica.

An injection of a few spoonfuls of hot water into the rectum with a little
asafoetida is an effective remedy, and will be good for an adult.

_CONSTIPATION._

1. This is a very frequent ailment of infants. The first thing necessary is
for the mother to regulate her diet.

2. If the child is nursed regularly and held out at the same time of each
day, it will seldom be troubled with this complaint. Give plenty of
_water_. Regularity of habit is the remedy. If this method fails, use a
soap suppository. Make it by paring a piece of white castile soap round. It
should be made about the size of a lead pencil, pointed at the end.

3. Avoid giving a baby drugs. Let the physician administer them if
necessary. {329}

_DIARRHOEA._

Great care should be exercised by parents in checking the diarrhoea of
children. Many times serious diseases are brought on by parents being too
hasty in checking this disorder of the bowels. It is an infant's first
method of removing obstructions and overcoming derangements of the system.

_SUMMER COMPLAINT._

1. Summer complaint is an irritation and inflammation of the lining
membranes of the intestines. This may often be caused by teething, eating
indigestible food, etc.

2. If the discharges are only frequent and yellow and not accompanied with
pain, there is no cause for anxiety; but if the discharges are green, soon
becoming gray, brown and sometimes frothy, having a mixture of phlegm, and
sometimes containing food undigested, a physician had better be summoned.

3. For mild attacks the following treatment may be given:

1) Keep the child perfectly quiet and keep the room well aired.

2) Put a drop of tincture of camphor on a teaspoonful of sugar, mix
thoroughly; then add 6 teaspoonfuls of hot water and give a teaspoonful of
the mixture every ten minutes. This is indicated where the discharges are
watery, and where there is vomiting and coldness of the feet and hands.
Chamomilla is also an excellent remedy. Ipecac and nux vomica may also be
given.

In giving homoeopathic remedies, give 5 or 6 pellets every 2 or 3 hours.

3) The diet should be wholesome and nourishing.

_FOR TEETHING._

If a child is suffering with swollen gums, is feverish, restless, and
starts in its sleep, give nux vomica. {330}

WORMS.

_PIN WORMS._

Pin worms and round worms are the most common in children. They are
generally found in the lower bowels.

SYMPTOMS.--Restlessness, itching about the anus in the fore part of the
evening, and worms in the faeces.

TREATMENT.--Give with a syringe an injection of a tablespoonful of linseed
oil. Cleanliness is also very necessary.

_ROUND WORMS._

A round worm is from six to sixteen inches in length, resembling the common
earth worm. It inhabits generally the small intestines, but it sometimes
enters the stomach and is thrown up by vomiting.

SYMPTOMS.--Distress, indigestion, swelling of the abdomen, grinding of the
teeth, restlessness, and sometimes convulsions.

TREATMENT.--One teaspoonful of powdered wormseed mixed with a sufficient
quantity of molasses, or spread on bread and butter.

Or, one grain of santonine every four hours for two or three days, followed
by a brisk cathartic. Wormwood tea is also highly recommended.

  SWAIM'S VERMIFUGE.
  2 ounces wormseed,
  11/2 ounces valerian,
  11/2 ounces rhubarb,
  11/2 ounces pink-root,
  11/2 ounces white agaric.

Boil in sufficient water to yield 3 quarts of decoction, and add to it 30
drops of oil of tansy and 45 drops of oil of cloves, dissolved in a quart
of rectified spirits. Dose, 1 teaspoonful at night.

_ANOTHER EXCELLENT VERMIFUGE._

  Oil of wormseed, 1 ounce,
  Oil of anise, 1 ounce,
  Castor oil, 1 ounce,
  Tinct. of myrrh, 2 drops,
  Oil of turpentine, 10 drops.

Mix thoroughly. Always shake well before using. Give 10 to 15 drops in cold
coffee, once or twice a day.

       *       *       *       *       *


{331}
