
CEREMONY OF THE INITIATION OF A NUN.

The disposition to take the veil, even among young girls, is not
uncommon in Brazil. The opposition of friends can prevent it, until they
are twenty five years old; but after that time they are considered
competent to decide for themselves. A writer describes the initiation of
a young lady, whose wealthy parents were extremely reluctant to have her
take the vow. She held a lighted torch in her hand, in imitation of the
prudent virgins; and when the priest chanted, "Your spouse approaches;
come forth and meet him," she approached the altar singing, "I follow
with my whole heart;" and, accompanied by two nuns already professed,
she knelt before the bishop. She seemed very lovely, with an unusually
sweet, gentle, and pensive countenance. She did not look particularly or
deeply affected; but when she sung her responses, there was something
exceedingly mournful in the soft, tremulous, and timid tones of her
voice. The bishop now exhorted her to make a public profession of her
vows before the congregation, and said, "Will you persevere in your
purpose of holy chastity?" She blushed deeply, and, with a downcast
look, lowly, but firmly answered, "I will." He again said, more
distinctly, "Do you promise to preserve it?" and she replied more
emphatically, "I do promise." The bishop then said, "Thanks be to God;"
and she bent forward and reverently kissed his hand, while he asked her,
"Will you be blest and consecrated?" She replied, "Oh! I wish it."

The habiliments, in which she was hereafter to be clothed, were
sanctified by the aspersion of holy water: then followed several prayers
to God, that "As he had blessed the garments of Aaron, with ointment
which flowed from his head to his beard, so he would now bless the
garments of his servant, with the copious dew of his benediction." When
the garment was thus blessed, the girl retired with it; and having laid
aside the dress in which she had appeared, she returned, arrayed in her
new attire, except her veil. A gold ring was next provided, and
consecrated with a prayer, that she who wore it "might be fortified with
celestial virtue, to preserve a pure faith, and incorrupt fidelity to
her spouse, Jesus Christ." He last took the veil, and her female
attendants having uncovered her head, he threw it over her, so that it
fell on her shoulders and bosom, and said, "Receive this sacred veil,
under the shadow of which you may learn to despise the world, and submit
yourself truly, and with all humility of heart, to your Spouse;" to
which she sung a response, in a very sweet, soft, and touching voice:
"He has placed this veil before my face that I should see no lover but
himself."

The bishop now kindly took her hand, and held it while the following
hymn was chanted by the choir with great harmony: "Beloved Spouse,
come--the winter is passed--the turtle sings, and the blooming vines are
redolent of summer."

A crown, a necklace, and other female ornaments, were now taken by the
bishop and separately blessed; and the girl bending forward, he placed
them on her head and neck, praying that she might be thought worthy "to
be enrolled into the society of the hundred and forty-four thousand
virgins, who preserved their chastity and did not mix with the society
of impure women."

Last of all, he placed the ring on the middle finger of her right hand,
and solemnly said, "So I marry you to Jesus Christ, who will henceforth
be your protector. Receive this ring, the pledge of your faith, that you
may be called the spouse of God." She fell on her knees, and sung, "I am
married to him whom angels serve, whose beauty the sun and moon admire;"
then rising, and showing with exultation her right hand, she said,
emphatically, as if to impress it on the attention of the congregation,
"My Lord has wedded me with this ring, and decorated me with a crown as
his spouse. I here renounce and despise all earthly ornaments for his
sake, whom alone I see, whom alone I love, in whom alone I trust, and to
whom alone I give all my affections. My heart hath uttered a good word:
I speak of the deed I have done for my King." The bishop then pronounced
a general benediction, and retired up to the altar; while the nun
professed was borne off between her friends, with lighted tapers, and
garlands waving.



WEDDED LOVE IS INFINITELY PREFERABLE TO VARIETY.

  Hail, wedded love, mysterious law, true source
  Of human offspring, sole propriety,
  In Paradise of all things common else!

    By thee adult'rous lust was driven from men,
  Among the bestial herds to range; by thee,
  Founded in reason, loyal, just and pure,
  Relations dear, and all the charities
  Of father, son, and brother, first were known.

    Thou art the fountain of domestic sweets,
  Whose bed is undefiled and chaste pronounced.
  Here Love his golden shafts employs, here lights
  His constant lamp, and waves his purple wings,
  Reigns here and revels; not in the bought smile
  Of harlots, loveless, joyless, unendear'd,
  Casual fruition; nor in court amours,
  Mix'd dance, or wanton mask, or midnight ball,
  Or serenade, which the starved lover sings
  To his proud fair, best quitted with disdain.

