
DESCENDANTS.


The great Creator, having formed man of the dust of the earth, "made a
deep sleep to fall upon him, and took one of his ribs, and closed up the
flesh instead thereof. And the rib, which the Lord God had taken from
man, made he a woman, and brought her unto the man." Hence the fair sex,
in the opinion of some authors, being formed of matter doubly refined,
derive their superior beauty and excellence.

Not long after the creation, the first woman was tempted by the serpent
to eat of the fruit of a certain tree, in the midst of the garden of
Eden, with regard to which God had said, "Ye shall not eat of it,
neither shall ye touch it, lest ye die."

This deception, and the fatal consequences arising from it, furnish the
most interesting story in the whole history of the sex.

On the offerings being brought, and that of Abel accepted, Cain's
jealousy and resentment rose to such a pitch, that, as soon as they came
down from the mount where they had been sacrificing, he fell upon his
brother and slew him.

For this cruel and barbarous action, Cain and his posterity, being
banished from the rest of the human race, indulged themselves in every
species of wickedness. On this account, it is supposed, they were called
the _Sons and Daughters of Men_. The posterity of Seth, on the other
hand, became eminent for virtue, and a regard to the divine precepts. By
their regular and amiable conduct, they acquired the appellation of
_Sons and Daughters of God_.

After the deluge there is a chasm in the history of women, until the
time of the patriarch Abraham. They then begin to be introduced into the
sacred story. Several of their actions are recorded. The laws, customs,
and usages, by which they were governed, are frequently exhibited.

