
WOMEN OF OTAHEITE.

In Otaheite, an island in the Southern Ocean, we are presented with
women of a singular character. As far as we can recollect, we think it
is a pretty general rule, that whatever the sex are accustomed to be
constantly clothed, they are ashamed to appear naked: those of Otaheite
seem however to be an exception to this rule; to show themselves in
public, with or without clothing, appears to be to them a matter of
equal indifference, and the exposition of any part of their bodies, is
not attended with the least backwardness or reluctance; circumstances
from which we may reasonably infer, that among them, clothes were not
originally invented to cover shame, but either as ornaments, or as a
defence against the cold. But a still more striking singularity in the
character of these women, and which distinguishes them not only from the
females of all other nations, but likewise from those of almost all
other animals, is, their performing in public those rites, which in
every other part of the globe, and among almost all animals, are
performed in privacy and retirement: whether this is the effect of
innocence, or of a dissoluteness of manners to which no other people
have yet arrived, remains still to be discovered; that they are
dissolute, even beyond any thing we have hitherto recorded, is but too
certain. As polygamy is not allowed among them, to satisfy the lust of
variety, they have a society called Arreoy, in which every woman is
common to every man; and when any of these women happens to have a
child, it is smothered in the moment of its birth, that it may not
interrupt the pleasures of its infamous mother; but in this juncture,
should nature relent at so horrid a deed, even then the mother is not
allowed to save her child, unless she can find a man who will patronise
it as a father; in which case, the man is considered as having
appropriated the woman to himself, and she is accordingly extruded from
this hopeful society. These few anecdotes sufficiently characterise the
women of this island.


CRIM. CON. OF CLAUDIUS AND POMPEIA.

Our own times furnish us with an instance of a ceremony from which all
women are carefully excluded;[2] but the Roman ladies, in performing the
rites sacred to the good goddess, were even more afraid of the men than
our masons are of women; for we are told by some authors, that so
cautious were they of concealment, that even the statutes and pictures
of men and other male animals were hood-winked with a thick veil. The
house of the consul, though commonly so large that they might have been
perfectly secured against all intrusion in some remote apartment of it,
was obliged to be evacuated by all male animals, and even the consul
himself was not suffered to remain in it. Before they began their
ceremonies, every corner and lurking place in the house was carefully
searched, and no caution omitted to prevent all possibility of being
discovered by impertinent curiosity, or disturbed by presumptive
intrusion. But these cautions were not all the guard that was placed
around them; The laws of the Romans made it death for any man to be
present at the solemnity.

Such being the precautions, and such the penalties for insuring the
secrecy of this ceremony, it was only once attempted to be violated,
though it existed from the foundation of the Roman empire till the
introduction of Christianity; and this attempt was made, not so much
perhaps with a view to be present at the ceremony, as to fulfil an
assignation with a mistress. Pompeia, the wife of Caesar, having been
suspected of a criminal correspondence with Claudius, and so closely
watched that she could find no opportunity of gratifying her passion, at
last, by the means of a female slave, settled an assignation with him at
the celebration of the rites of the good goddess. Claudius was directed
to come in the habit of a singing girl, a character he could easily
personate, being young and of a fair complexion. As soon as the slave
saw him enter, she ran to inform her mistress. The mistress eager to
meet her lover, immediately left the company and threw herself into his
arms, but could not be prevailed upon by him to return so soon as he
thought necessary for their mutual safety; upon which he left her, and
began to take a walk through the rooms, always avoiding the light as
much as possible. While he was thus walking by himself, a maid servant
accosted him, and desired him to sing; he took no notice of her, but she
followed and urging him so closely, that he was at last obliged to
speak. His voice betrayed his sex; the maid servant shrieked, and
running into the room where the rites were performing, told that a man
was in the house. The women in the utmost consternation, threw a veil
ever the mysteries, ordered the doors to be secured, and with lights in
their hands, ran about the house searching for the sacrilegious
intruder. They found him in the apartment of the slave who had admitted
him, drove him out with ignominy, and, though it was in the middle of
the night immediately dispersed, to give an account to their husbands of
what had happened. Claudius was soon after accused of having profaned
the holy rites; but the populace declaring in his favor, the judges,
fearing an insurrection, were obliged to acquit him.

    [2] Masonry

